GE2223
Interpersonal Skills
and
Positive Personal
Development
Session 1
Introduction to the course
1

Welcome to the course

• Course Tutor: Dr. Estella Chan
• Email: estella@cityu.edu.hk

2

Special Notes
1. No Zoom class arrangement
• According to the latest regulations announced by the University, all courses will be conducted in
a face-to-face setting. All students must come back to the campus for class attendance. No
classes via the online Zoom platform will be arranged. If students cannot return to the campus to
attend classes due to an infected case of COVID-19 [or other health issues], please report to your
course instructor immediately and make an official application for sick leave with the support of
medical documents.
2. No audio-visual recordings or photo/picture taking is allowed.
- Unless with formal and prior approval from the respective Course Leader, students are not
allowed to take photos/pictures or keep audio-visual recordings in any format with any kind of
electronic or mechanical devices in a class, whether face-to-face or online. The University
reserves the right to protect the intellectual property of its academic staff.
- Since students may talk about their own personal experiences and share their self-reflections,
audio or video recording and photo taking of any part of the class is strictly prohibited to protect
the students' privacy. For the same reasons, the course tutor will not record this course.
3
•

Special Notes
3. Departmental Guidelines for Late Drop of Courses
a. In general, after the mid-term (7th session) of an academic semester, late drop applications will not
be accepted unless with extenuating circumstances such as illness, hospitalization, accident, family
bereavement, or other unforeseeable serious personal or emotional circumstances.
b. Whichever is the earlier, a late drop will also not be accepted after completing the first assignment
(which contributes a weighting of 20% or above) of the course unless with extenuating
circumstances.
c. All applications should be supported with documents duly signed by medical practitioners,
registered professionals, counsellors, or authorized bodies. Without supporting documents, approval
will not be granted.
d. In any contingent situations, official documents duly signed and provided by the organizations
concerned should be submitted as justifications for the late drop applications.
•
•

4. The use of generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) tools is not allowed.
Students must demonstrate their reflective, analytical, synthesizing, and academic writing abilities in
working with their assignments. Accordingly, generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) tools are strictly
prohibited in their in-class assignments, group projects and individual papers. If the use of GenAI tools is
detected, it will be treated as academic dishonesty. It may result in grade deduction, failure in the course
or other consequences, subject to the course leader’s discretion.
4

Class Rules
• Join the class punctually. Put away your phone and other unnecessary idevices during class time.
• Active participation in class exercises, role-plays and other learning
activities is required.
• Self-reflection and self-disclosure are encouraged but at your own readiness
and pace/degree/depth…
• Be non-judgmental, accepting and supportive; keep confidentiality…
• Mutual respect, mutual learning and mutual growth
• Effective communication: have eye contact (face-to-face human
contact/touch); be attentive/actively listening (whole-body
listening)/concentrate and not do other things while others are communicating
with you/quality time; be other-oriented…)
• No audio or video recording of any part of the class is allowed. Phototaking is also absolutely prohibited. Be respectful, trustworthy, ethical
and responsible for your own behaviour. Shift from egocentric
communicator to other-orientated communicator.
5

•

Source: Beebe, S. A., Beebe, S. J., & Redmond, M. V. (2011). Interpersonal communication: relating to others. Boston: Ally & Bacon. (p.129)

• “ Communication is to a relationship what breathing
is to maintaining life. ” —Virginia Satir
• Effective communication: • Listen attentively while the other person is talking (whole-body
listening, give your quality time)
• When you’re talking, I will stop talking but listen.
6
• Both you and I are talking X effective communication / X respect

• Sometimes, we are egocentric communicators; we create messages
without giving much thought to the person who is listening.
• To be egocentric is to be self-focused and self-absorbed.
• Research suggests that being egocentric is detrimental to developing
healthy relationships with others. If we fail to adapt our message to
our listeners, we may not be successful in achieving our intended
communication goal.
• Shift from Egocentric communicator to Other-orientated
communicator.
7

Being Other-Oriented
• Lucy seems startled to learn that the world does not revolve
around her. Sometimes we may need someone like Linus to
remind us that we’re not the center of the universe.
• The signature concept for our study of interpersonal communication is
the goal of becoming other-oriented in relationships.

• To be an other-oriented communicator is to consider the

thoughts, needs, experiences, personality, emotions,
motives, desires, culture, and goals of your
communication partners, while still maintaining your
own integrity.
• The choices we make in forming our messages, in deciding how best to
express those messages, and in deciding when and where to deliver

those messages will be made more effective when we
consider the other person’s thoughts and feelings. 8(Beebe
et al., 2011:27)

Ethical Communicator
• Being other-oriented involves a conscious effort to consider the
world from the point of view of those with whom you interact.
• Adapting messages to others does not mean that we tell them
only what they want to hear; that would be unethical.
• Other-oriented communicators are ethical.
• Ethics are the beliefs, values, and moral principles by which we
determine what is right or wrong.
• To be an ethical communicator means to be sensitive to the
needs of others, to give people choices rather than forcing
them to act a certain way. (Beebe et al., 2011)
9

Ethical Communicator
• Unethical communicators believe that they know what other
people need, even without asking them for their preferences.
• Ethical communicators keep confidence; they keep private
information that others wish to be kept private.
• They also do not intentionally decrease others’ feelings of selfworth.
• Another key element in being an ethical communicator is
honesty.
• If you intentionally lie or distort the truth, then you are not
communicating ethically or effectively.
• Ethical communicators also don’t tell people only what they
want to hear. (Beebe et al., 2011)
10

Give me a hug: 8 life lessons from Nick your kids cannot miss, 2013
• Nick Vujicic once said in an interview:
• “People always complain that they can’t do this and they can’t do that. If we
look at our lives and concentrate on things that we don’t have or wish to
have, that doesn’t change the circumstances. The truth is that we have to

focus on what we have and make the best out of it.”
• If I had arms and legs, you wouldn’t be reading my life stories!
• Nick always encourages people to have dreams and focus on what
they can and are good at doing. Everything is possible if we try
our very best!
• Nick lives a happy life because he is thankful for everything he has.
He is grateful because he has a passion for life!

• Do not take things for granted. Also, be positive!

11

Life is full of choices

Corey, Gerald (2014). I never knew I had a choice: explorations in personal growth (10th ed.).
Australia: Brooks/Cole. (p.7)

• We are very good at and got used to seeing
the problems in our lives, in other’s lives,
in the world at large.
• Our focus is usually on what’s not working,
what’s not going well.
Habitually seeing the problem/deficit side.
• “We see what we look for and we miss much of what we are not
looking for even though it is there. The same can be said of what we
listen for. Our experience of the world is heavily influenced by where
we place our attention.” (Torres & Stavros, 2005:97)
• Note: To be strengths-oriented/focus on the positive/well side doesn’t
mean we become pollyanish and ignore the problems. It simply means
we broaden our view, embrace the whole picture and start
to appreciate the good there.
•  Appreciate your own strengths and those of others.

13

Learn to fail or
fail to learn

• Nobody likes to fail. However,
failure is an inescapable part of
life and a critically important
part of any successful life.
• We learn to walk by falling, to talk by
babbling, to shoot a basket by missing, and
to colour the inside of a square by scribbling
outside the box.

• Those who intensely fear failing
end up falling short of their
potential.

• We either learn to fail, or
we fail to learn.
Show this video in class for 13 mins if the time allows.
(Too much of a good thing - positive psychology 14 - Tal
Ben Shahar)Video Link: https://youtu.be/uKLCtqZ6yY?t=2845

• (Ben-Shahar, 2011:xvi)
14

Learn to fail or fail to learn
• There is no other way to learn and ultimately succeed.
(Ben-Shahar, 2011:10)

• There is no other way to grow, no other way to learn, no
other way to become more resilient, happier, and more
successful.
 No shortcut in our learning and growth process.
But be brave enough to get up, rebound, and learn from
our failures.
• We don’t need to be embarrassed as we are not
perfect; everybody has failed experiences in their
learning and growth process.
(Too much of a good thing - positive psychology 14 - Tal Ben Shahar; Video link:
15
https://youtu.be/uKLCtq-Z6yY?t=2845)

• We must accept that the
journey will not always be a
smooth, straight line. We will
inevitably encounter
obstacles and detours
along the way.
•  We need to be in touch
with reality and shift from
the perfectionist vision of a
failure-free, flawless,
smooth straight line of
success to something more
like an irregular upward
spiral.

Learn to fail or
fail to learn

16

(Source: Ben-Shahar, 2011:9)

• Look Up | Gary Turk (Official Video)
• Play this video in class if time allows.

•

Video: Look Up

5-min video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z7dLU6fk9QY

•
'Look Up' is a lesson taught to us
through a love story, in a world
where we continue to find ways to
make it easier for us to connect with
one another, but it always results in
us spending more time alone.

• Live life the real way!!

17

References
Beebe, S. A., Beebe, S. J., & Redmond, M. V. (2011).
Interpersonal communication: relating to others. Boston: Ally
& Bacon.

Ben-Shahar, Tal. (2011). The pursuit of perfect: how to stop
chasing perfection and start living a richer, happier life. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Stavros，J. M. & Torres, C. B. (2005). Dynamic
Relationships: Unleashing the Power of Appreciative Inquiry
in Daily Living. Ohio: Taos Institute Publications.

18

