GE2223
Interpersonal
Skills and
Positive Personal
Development
Sessions 2 & 3
Meeting new friends &
Self-understanding I & II

1

Rolfe et al’s 2001 Reflective Cycle
•
•

Describe the event
What did you notice?
What elements stood out?

•

Define a course of action
What’s possible?
What actions make sense?

Identify implications
Make sense of the facts
How did they affect
you/your client…?
•

Reference Sources:
Retrieved on 25-5-2021, from
https://essaywritingserviceuk.co
.uk/advice-and-guidance/rolfereflective-model
ScOPT (2017) Rolfe et al's
Reflective Framework (2001),
The Scottish Organisation for
Practice Teaching, [online]
Available from:
https://www.scopt.co.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2017/10/RolfeReflective-Framework.pdf.
https://www.fearlessculture.des
ign/blog-posts/what-so-whatnow-what

Rolfe, G., Freshwater, D., Jasper, M. (2001) Critical reflection in nursing and the helping professions: a
user’s guide. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. (A/V in CityU library)

You’re encouraged to practice using the 4Fs in your small group discussion/sharing to
familiarise yourself with these skills.
Self-reflection/Debriefing/Giving feedback skills
1. Facts 事實 - 經驗回顧 (倒後鏡：過程回顧) (An objective account
of what happened) - Make a short news report covering: What?
Who? Where? When? [Save Why? and How? for 'Findings'.]
What happened?
Feedback in this zone is fairly neutral and superficial - like looking in
the mirror or listening to an echo. It is based on information that can be
picked up by observation and does not include anything about
motivations or explanations.
從不同角度對事件或經歷，描述組員得到的觀察。當時發生了什
麼事？你／我／他做了什麼事？當時是如何解決所遇到的問題？
你對小組過程最深刻的事件／經歷是什麼？令你最難忘既經驗是
什麼？
What was most memorable/different/interesting? What were the turning
points or critical moments? What most influenced your attitude and
behaviour? What didn't happen that you thought/hoped would happen?

2. Feelings 感受 - 分享感受 (放大鏡：深刻體會感受) Emotions &
Intuitions (The emotional reactions to the situation)
Feedback in this zone involves revealing something about what is going on
under the surface. It does not involve judgements such as ''I feel that ...''.
請每一個組員都講吓自己嘅感受、情緒、心情
對於某人、某事，你最深刻感受的是什麼？
其他組員有冇回應或者似類嘅感受？ 其他組員有無同感？
當時最令你焦慮、擔心的是什麼？
此刻最令你開心的是什麼事？
你感受到當事人的心情是如何？
What are some of the feelings you experienced?
At what point did you feel most or least involved?
What were your personal highs and lows?

3. Findings 發現 - 學習檢視、啟發 (望遠鏡：個人啟示，前瞻應用)
Thinking & Seeking (The concrete learning that you can take away
from the situation)
Feedback in this zone can generate resistance because it involves being
judged by others. People are generally less resistant to positive
feedback and are more likely to listen, accept and use feedback if
they have specifically asked for it.
問組員在這節小組學到什麼（要正面嘅)
問組員有什麼發現，如:對自己及別人的優勢強項有何發現？
你最欣賞哪一位？你最想多謝誰？ 你給自己幾多分？為甚麼？
Why … did or didn’t it work?
What would you like to have done differently / more of / less of?
What was most/least valuable?

4. Future 將來 – 啟發、前膽探索(望遠鏡：個人啟示，前瞻應用)
Changes & Choices (Structuring your learning such that you can use it
in the future)
Feedback in this zone can take many forms. It is generally based on how
people respond to your attempts to tell or show them what you intend to do
in the future.
對將來會有何影響？對於你將來的個人啟示，前瞻應用
這／那件事對你的未來，你有什麼選擇？有何打算？你會做什麼？你
會做什麼令自己開心些、快樂些？ 你有何可行的改善方法、行動？ 今
次小組後，你回家會賞試做些在小組學到的什麼東西？
假設這情況（或另一種情況) 出現，你會怎樣? 下一步做甚麼?
How do you imagine using what you have learned? What choices do you
have?
How does it look to use the findings? What plan can you make for the
3
future?

Adapted from Roger Greenaway’s ‘The Active Reviewing Cycle” (https://reviewing.co.uk/learning-cycle/) Sources: Retrieved on 18-9-2021, from, http://reviewing.co.uk/learning-cycle/index.htm; Retrieved on 18-9-2021, from,
https://cd1.edb.hkedcity.net/cd/lwl/ole/PD_Resources/2008_2009/CS_Elderly/SESSION_5.pdf;
https://www.ed.ac.uk/reflection/reflectors-toolkit/reflecting-on-experience/four-f

解說/反思三個問題
3 Questions for Debriefing/Self-reflection
When you start doubting what you were doing with a
client, ask yourself three questions:
1.What did I do right?
2.What could I have done better?
3.What did I learn?
當你開始懷疑自己在案主身上做了什麼時，問問自己三個問題：
1.我做對了什麼？
2.什麼我本可以做得更好？
3.我學到了什麼？
(Caroline Maria Vassallo, 2021, Published in Gestalt Today Malta
https://www.academia.edu/49637034/Stepping_on_Eggshells_A_Visual_Representation_of_the_Borderline_Experience_within_a_G
4
estalt_psychotherapy_framework?email_work_card=title)

Session Outline
• Before making new friends, getting to know one another, and
building interpersonal relationships, understand yourself and
build up the intrapersonal relationship first since your selfconcepts and your relationship with yourself affect your social
behaviour, communication with others, interpersonal
relationships, etc.
• Self-concepts
• Exercise – Self-concepts
• Johari Window
• Trust walk
• Questionnaire on trust
• Self-disclosure
5
https://quotefancy.com/quote/28443/Steve-Maraboli-The-mostpowerful-relationship-you-will-ever-have-is-the-relationship-with

• Exercise – Self Concepts:
Where Do I Fit In?
Birds on Wire
At certain times of the year,
flocks of birds can be seen
(and heard) congregating at
city intersections on telephone
and power lines. There seems
to be a strong social order
among them. As you look at
the illustration, imagine that
you are one of the birds in the
flock. Look at the positions
and the interactions of the
birds, then decide which bird
you are. Circle that bird and
share why. (The past, the
present, the future you? The
private self, the real self, the
ideal self?)

6

• Exercise – Self Concepts: Where
Do I Fit In?
• The Forest
• In a natural forest, you will often
see a variety of trees in many sizes
and configurations. Some large
trees stand alone; others have little
trees growing beneath their
branches. Sometimes you’ll see a
cluster of small trees in a separate
space or a whole section of old,
tall, skinny trees. Study the
illustration of the forest and decide
which tree you are. Circle the
tree that represents you at this
time in your life. Where do you
stand in the forest? Are you
alone, or are you near the
others? What makes you
different or the same?
Elaborate.

7

Dare to dream the impossible dream
• Corey & Corey (2014:414): “The greatest hindrance to
your growth may be allowing your fear of failing to
stop you from doing what you most want to do.”
• Jerry (Gerald) Corey says: “fear of failing and feelings
of inadequacy have been my best teachers. I have
learned that failure isn’t fatal, that much can be
gained from reflecting on mistakes, and how essential
it is to have a personal vision. You may have
restricted your vision of what you might become by
not allowing yourself to formulate a vision or pursue
your dreams.” (Corey & Corey, 2014:414)

Dare to dream the impossible dream
• You’re encouraged to dare to dream what may seem
like impossible dreams, to believe in yourself in spite of
your self-doubts, and then to work hard to make your
dreams become a reality. Dare to dream, and then
have the courage to follow your passion. (Corey & Corey,
2014:414)

• Faith + Follow-up hard work  Fruit/ Fulfillment 
Passion/enjoy doing what you’re good at/success

Scenario
For all of you, it’s your first or second time
seeing one another in this class/course. Many
classmates are total strangers to you. In the first
session last week, we found that some classmates
managed to be rather active and chatted happily
with one another, though they should barely know
each other. Some looked quieter, and you are not
sure if they were friendly or not. You know this is
the time to meet new friends as you need to form
your small group for the group project today, so
you have to try it a try…
10

Discussion  Self-Reflection
Discuss the below after the scenario
activity:
• What did you say or do in an attempt to join
others? What made you choose that way?
• How did you feel? Did you worry? What did
you worry about?
11

Self-reflection
• How do you think other people will perceive what you
said or did? Is that (others’ response) what you want?
• What do you want after all, i.e., what is your goal?
• Are you trying to present [express or impress] yourself
in a certain way? What is your “Self”?
• What is your “Self” that you want others to know?
12

Self Concepts
Self concepts are constituted by what you
think about yourself
Public self concepts –
your perception of self
as appear to others
Private self concepts –
your perception of self
as you see yourself
internally
13

Self Concepts
Self concepts are constituted by what you
think about yourself
Ideal self – What
you want
yourself to be.

Real self – How
you see yourself
as you truly are.
14

Self Concepts
Self concepts are constituted by what you
think about yourself
Public self concepts –
your perception of self
as appear to others

Ideal self – What
you want yourself
to be.

How do your self concepts affect your
social behaviors?
Private self concepts –
Real self – How
you see yourself
as you truly are.

your perception of self
as your see yourself
internally
15

Self-reflection
• Is your “Online Self” different from your
“Offline Self”?
• Would people who know you online have the
same impression of you if they met you in
person?

16

Note:
• Public Self-Concept may or may not be congruent with Real
(Private) Self-Concept
• e.g., Superiority - Inferiority complex
• Rollo May (1953:68) says: “The person who feels weak
becomes a bully, the inferior person a braggart, a flexing of
muscles, much talk, cockiness, an endeavor to brazen it out are
symptoms of covert anxiety in a person
or a group.”
pseudo self-esteem – the pretence of
self-efficacy and self-respect
Tal Ben-Shahar:
A person who is humble, who doesn’t
need constantly show off is usually the
17
person with higher levels of self-esteem.

18

Beebe, S. A., Beebe, S. J., & Redmond, M. V. (2011). Interpersonal communication: relating to others. Boston: Ally
& Bacon. (p.274)

Definition of Self-esteem/Self-worth
• “Self-esteem is the disposition to experience oneself as
competent to cope with the basic challenges of life and
as worthy of happiness.”
Nathaniel Branden (1994:27)
Self-worth is often used interchangeably with selfesteem.
Self-esteem (Self-worth): Your evaluation of your
worth or value based on your perception of such
things as your skills, abilities, talents, and appearance.
(Beebe et al., 2011:43)
19

How Your Self-Concept
Developed?

How Your Self-Concept Developed
• One of the ways we develop our self-concept is by
interacting with others.
• Our sense of who we are is a consequence of our
relationships with others.
• Our selves change primarily because of how people
respond to us.
• “We are not our brother’s keeper; we are our
brother’s marker.”
• (Beebe et al., 2011:38)
21

Social environment/interaction our sense of self
• Identity and one’s sense of oneself (or of one’s self) is a
product of our social environment and a result of the
interactions we have with others and how those others view
and treat us in return.
• We may learn about ourselves primarily by experimenting or
improvising, by trying on roles, by performing or
presenting ourselves to others and then by internalizing the
feedback we receive from them and from the effects of our
behavior on others.
• We come to see ourselves as individuals – and as individuals of
a certain type, with certain traits and characteristics – by
differentiating ourselves from and in relation to others.
(Erving Goffman, 1959 in Davidson et al., 2010:149 )
22

Others’ evaluations may render us depression
• Depressed people are overly dependent on the

evaluations and approval of others for their selfesteem, as a result of poor nurturing by parents.
They are constantly striving to be “perfect” so that
they will be loved.
• Even when they accomplish great things, they do not feel
secure or positive about themselves.
• Eventually, a problem in a close relationship or a
failure to achieve perfection occurs, and they plunge
into depression. (Nolesn-Hoeksema, 2011) [Leslie Cheung
perfectionist  depression  suicide]

23

Dependent Self-esteem
• Persons with high dependent self-esteem is other
determined. They enjoy and need others’ appraisal.
• e.g., If I do well in a course, and I get a high tlq that
makes me great. If I don’t get great feedback, I feel
awful. If some students tell me that they don’t like
something that I said, I feel awful. My life is
constantly affected by what other people think or
say, or what I think that they think, or what I think
that they mean. Constant evaluation what do other
people think of me. Like looking glass. Looking at
other people as it reflects on me, and taking their
evaluation as the sense of that I have. (Tal Ben-Shahar)
24

Chinese: “Other” orientation
• … a complicated pattern of social interaction in which

Chinese are readily influenced by others on both
psychological and behavioural levels.
• …a person is said to be other-oriented if he or she is

especially sensitive to others’ opinions, standards, and
criticisms, always worries about the impression that he
or she will make or has made on others, and tries hard
to conform to others’ behaviour. (Yang, 1995:34)
•  their mental health may be adversely affected by the

negative comments others made about them, be such comments
real or perceived
25

Chinese: “Other” orientation
• (1) Chinese tend to be unsure about the nature and intensity of their own
feelings and opinions, and they need to know those of others so that theirs
can be adequately evaluated through social comparison;
• (2) they want to find out others’ feelings and opinions so they can act
accordingly;
• (3) they need to make sure whether or not their own opinions are the same as
those of others in order to avoid criticism, ridicule, rejection, or
punishment for having different opinions, and to win approval,
acceptance, or appreciation;
• (4) they need to know others’ feelings and opinions about them in order to
define or redefine themselves continuously.
• The major purpose for the Chinese to pay such constant attention to other
people’s opinions is to protect themselves by reducing differences and
retaining similarities in opinions between themselves and others.
(Yang,1995:34)
26

The Importance of Self-Esteem
• Of all the judgments we pass in life, none is more
important than the judgment we pass on
ourselves.
Nathaniel Branden
• The greatest evil that can befall man is that he
should come to think ill of himself.
Goethe (歌德)
• Nobody can make you feel inferior without your
consent.
Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (安娜·埃莉諾·羅斯福)
27

Do you know yourself？

The Johari Window

The Johari Window Model (video download)
~4-min video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BWii4Tx3GJk

(to)

(to)

(to)

(to)

29

Johari Window
• It is believed that there are certain things that you
know about yourself and certain things you don’t
know about yourself; and there are certain things
other people know about you and certain things
they don’t know.
• Johari Window Model [developed by American
psychologists Joseph Luft and Harry Ingham]: Model
of self-disclosure that summarizes how selfawareness is influenced by self-disclosure and
information about yourself from others (Beebe et al.,
2011:54)

30

Johari Window
•

•
•
•

The "open" quadrant represents things that both
I know about myself, and that you know about
me.
The "blind" quadrant represents things that you
know about me, but that I am unaware of.
The "hidden" quadrant represents things that I
know about myself, that you do not know.
The "unknown" quadrant represents things that
neither I know about myself, nor you know
about me.
31

Johari Window Questionnaire
Instruction:
• Carefully read each numbered item and its statements marked
"A" and "B."
• Assign a point value to the A and B statements as follows:
– The total point value for A and B added together is five
(5).
– If statement A is most similar to what you would do, mark
5 for A and 0 for B.
– If A is not wholly satisfactory, but in your judgment better
than B, mark 4 or 3 for A and 1 or 2 for B.
• The converse is true: if B is best mark 5 for B and 0 for A and
32
so on.

Note:
• The result of the Johari Window questionnaire
is just for your reference, and it may not
reflect your actual situation for some reasons,
like cultural factors.
• If there is any discrepancy between your
understanding of yourself and the result
indicated in the test, trust yourself and
disregard the result.
33

Openness dominant characteristic

Open

Hidden

Hidden

Open

Blind

Hidden

Unknown

Blind

Unknown

Hidden dominant characteristic
Open

Unknown dominant characteristic

Blind dominant characteristic

Blind

Open

Blind

Hidden

Unknown

Unknown

34

Openness dominant characteristic
• When two people have been successfully open and
candid with one another and developed trust and
concern, their relationship is characterized by a large
OPEN area.
• Through disclosure of appropriate information and
the acceptance of feedback from others, a person can
develop a relationship in which most of the
information about both people becomes a legitimate
source of discussion and shared understanding.
35

Unknown dominant characteristic
• In any relationship, especially in highly bureaucratic
organization, when one party believes in remaining
aloof and impersonal in dealing with the other party,
neither self disclosure nor feedback are worth the
risk or the effect. In such relationship, members
choose to be uncommunicative and rigid. Little
trust develops in the relationship and communication
is restrained and predominantly one-way and task
oriented.

36

Hidden dominant characteristics
• In this type of relationship, a person finds it legitimate
and appropriate to listen to feedback from the other
person, but keeps most things about himself/herself
private or hidden.
• This may be because the person does not trust the
other person enough to share anything personal or
he/she may be insecure, having a negative self
concept, or feeling that the other person would not
understand.
• This unbalanced method of taking in feedback
without reciprocal self-disclosure is likely to wind
up with a breakdown of communication and a build
37
up of distrust and anxiety.

Blind dominant characteristics
• This is a type of relationship where a person is
more than willing to disclose information about
himself/herself, but unwilling to listen to
feedback from others. People who feel their
own opinion worth more than others or see
themselves as valuable resource to others tend to
have little time to listen to others. Such a person is
subject to "blindspots".

38

Johari Window
• As people communicate most effectively in
the open area where we do not have to
spend our psychic energy maintaining
false impressions or "masks", usually, the
larger the open area, the more successful
is the relationship.

• How can increase the open
area in our Johari Window?
39

Johari Window
• Disclosure of appropriate information to and
the acceptance of feedback from others can
help us to enlarge our open area and to arrive
at better relationship with people at home, at
work or in our friendship circle.

• How about analyzing our
dreams?
40

Johari Window
http://www.mindtools.com/CommSkll/JohariWindow.htm

How to Keep a Dream Journal
Play this video in class if time allows.
7-minute video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1aKMVfpg6B8

42

Dreams as a path to self-understanding
Dreams can reveal significant clues to events that have meaning
for us.  about our struggles, wants, goals, purposes,
conflicts, and interests. (Corey & Corey, 2014:412)
Dreams can shed a powerful light on our past, present and
future dynamics and on our attempt to construct meaning.
(Corey & Corey, 2014:412)

Dreaming helps us deal with stress, work through loss and
grief, resolve anger, and bring closure to painful life
situations. (Corey & Corey, 2014:412)
Our dreams can provide us with a path towards greater
understanding of ourselves and our relationships with
others. (Corey & Corey, 2014:412)
Dreams can reveal significant aspects of our past and present
struggles. As a gateway to the unconscious, dreaming can
also inform us of our future strivings. (Corey & Corey, 2014:414)
43

Dreams as a path to self-understanding
For Freud, dreams are: • profoundly meaningful expressions
• are windows into an otherwise inaccessible mind, “the royal
road to the unconscious”
• are a person's most deeply held wishes, expressed in
disguised form; take threatening content and turn it into
symbols
•  as a guardian of sleep and as a safety valve for
unacceptable wishes
• disguised wishes of infantile sexual needs
•  the wish fulfilment function of dreams
•  venting our emotions or fulfilling our unconscious wishes
44

Dreams as a path to self-understanding
According to Fritz Perls (1969, 1970), a founder of Gestalt
therapy,
- the dream is the most spontaneous expression of the existence
of the human being;
- it is a piece of art that individuals chisel out of their lives.
- It represents an unfinished situation, … an unfulfilled wish,
or a prophecy.
- Every dream contains an existential message about oneself
and one’s current struggle. (Corey & Corey, 2014:413)
- Dreams are full of symbols. (Corey & Corey, 2014:413)
- In Gestalt therapy no established meaning fits every; rather,
meaning is deciphered by each individual. (Corey & Corey,
2014:414)

45

Dreams as a path to self-understanding
It is possible that dreams reflect our traumatic memories, our
needs, and our unconscious "thoughts." So, dreams are
thought to tell us something about ourselves we did not
know
• dreams underscore our current problems, rather than
hide or erase them
• associated with the things that are consciously worrying us
•  It is as though bad dreams are telling us: HEY, PAY
ATTENTION TO THIS PROBLEM!
• dreams are giving us solutions for important but repressed
problems
•  the conscious mind, busy with coping, often passes on
difficult emotional problems to the unconscious mind for
solving
• dreams do reflect our concerns of the day and our memories
46

Exploring the meaning of dreams
Dreams are not mysterious; they are avenues to selfunderstanding. (Corey & Corey, 2014:412)
- Record your dreams in your journal [including all the
details of the dream, each person, event, and mood in it.
When you wake from a dream, is your feeling state one
of fear, joy, sadness, frustration, surprise, or anger?]
- Share a dream with someone you trust can be selfrevealing and helpful
- If you journal around themes in your dreams, you may
begin to see more parallels between your sleeping
and waking life. (Corey & Corey, 2014:412)
47

Why am I afraid to tell you who I am?
為什麼我不敢告訴你我是誰？

This
book is
available
in the
CityU
library!

Powell, John. (1969/1995).
Why am I afraid to tell you
who I am?: insights on selfawareness, personal growth
and interpersonal
communication. London:
Fount

「我不敢告訴你我是誰，因為如果我告訴你
我是誰，你可能會不喜歡這個『誰』；而這
48
個『誰』，卻是我僅有的一切。」

The Gifts of Imperfection
The gifts of imperfection: let go of who you think you're
supposed to be and embrace who you are — Brene Brown (2010)

“The curious paradox is that when I accept myself just
as I am, then I can change.” — Carl R. Rogers [Change is easier
when I accept myself!]
 We don’t need to be perfect, as there is no
perfect person!
 Each of us is unique, and we are given
different talents/gifts from our creator.
 Be authentic and be natural  We are
naturally beautiful with our natural
contingencies, our given potentials/ strengths
and weaknesses/limitations  embrace our
gifts and the beauty of imperfection.
 Nature, to be commanded, must be obeyed.
(Francis Bacon)

 Give your permission to be human

Francis Bacon: "Nature, to be
commanded, must be obeyed"
(Philosophy of Education, Part 12, Sec. 3f)
~2-min video: https://youtu.be/VabBycMkpRY

Life is limitless. Limits are what we choose.
生命是無限的。限制/極限是我們選擇的。
Accept ourselves, accept our imperfections!

接受自己，擁抱不完美!

沒有四肢的力克快樂告白：我
那好到不像話的人生！
4-min video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h3b
RhZCdRaE

We can be great even though we are not
perfect. Imperfect people can do impossible
things. Life without limbs can be life without
limits!
Don’t let others’ negative words/opinions
about you discourage/defeat you/shape your
identity [but you’re encouraged to have self-reflection on
others’ views if you received similar views from different
persons/on different occasions].

Don’t compare yourself with others. You’re
unique. Be true to yourself and others. Be
courageous to pursue your goal/goals/to realize
your dreams/life aspirations despite previous50
failures.

Give me a hug: 8 life lessons from Nick
your kids cannot miss, June 2013
 Nick Vujicic once said in an interview:

 “People always complain that they can’t do this and they can’t do that. If we look at our lives
and concentrate on things that we don’t have or wish to have, that doesn’t change the
circumstances. The truth is that we have to focus on what we have and make the best out
of it.”
 Actually, if I had arms and legs, you wouldn’t be reading my life stories!
 Nick always encourages people to have dreams and to focus on what they can do and what
they are good at doing. Everything is possible if we try our very best!
 Nick lives a happy life because he is thankful for everything he has. He is thankful
because he has passion for life!

 do not take things for granted!! Also, be positive!!

Change from “life without limbs” to “life without limits”
51 Vujicic ~ 鼓舞人的故事
Life Without Limbs - Inspiring story of Nick
11-min video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jmjOZ6ru-pA

God can use imperfect people to do impossible things. ... God is
going to use you in spite of your imperfections and sometimes
because of your imperfections to make a big difference in the
lives of other people, and for his kingdom. … there’s a certain gift
in your own imperfection.
– Pastor Bobby Schuller (Vulnerability - 15-1-2017 )

Remember天造之才，皆有其用!
“We are never only or entirely how we are defined by
others. We are always more than this, and it is always possible
that in the future we will be different from who we have
been in the past.” (Davidson, Rakfeldt & Strauss, 2010:155)
別人對我們的定義從來都不是唯一或完全是我們真實的自我。我們總是不止於此，而且將來
的我們總是有可能與過去不同。

Be hopeful; to glow and grow (要有希望;要發光和成長)

Post-traumatic Growth is possible!!

尼采

• Nietzsche (尼采) famously remarked that what does not kill us makes us
stronger. Suffering can make us more resilient and better able to endure
hardships (那些沒有那些沒有將我們至於死地的事物，將使我更堅強。)
(Ben-Shahar, 2011:194).

• Helen Keller [海倫·凱勒, deaf-blind], who in her lifetime knew much
suffering, as well as joy, noted that “character cannot be developed in ease
and quiet. Only through experience of trial and suffering can the soul be
strengthened, vision cleared, ambition inspired, and success achieved.”
(Ben-Shahar, 2011:194)

(https://www.viacharacter.org/character-strengths#)

24 種性格優勢
在 2000 年代初期，社會科學領域發生了一
些突破性的事情：科學家發現了一種包含
24 種性格優勢的通用語言，這些性格優勢
構成了我們性格中最好的一面。每個人都
在不同程度上擁有全部 24 種性格優勢，因
此每個人都擁有真正獨特的性格優勢概況
。每一種性格力量都屬於這六大美德類別
之一，這些美德類別在不同文化和國家中
是普遍存在的。
(https://www.viacharacter.org/character-strengths#)

(https://www.viacharacter.org/character-strengths#)

Everybody has a set of
strengths as uniquely their
own as their signature.
 Signature strengths

The 24 Character Strengths
In the early 2000s, something groundbreaking
occurred in the social sciences: Scientists
discovered a common language of 24
character strengths that make up what’s best
about our personality. Everyone possesses
all 24 character strengths in different
degrees, so each person has a truly unique
character strengths profile. Each character
strength falls under one of these six broad
virtue categories, which are universal across
cultures and nations.
(https://www.viacharacter.org/character-strengths#)

天造之才

皆有其用

Students are encouraged to do the online survey to understand their
signature strengths. https://www.viacharacter.org/account/register

Most participants
report feelings of
pride and
expansiveness,
with the discovery
of a self that is
invariably better
than expected (Resnick
& Rosenheck, 2006).

55

Know thyself, develop your own potential, believe in your strengths and
lead a happy life!
認識自己，發展自己的潛能，相信自己的優勢，過上幸福快樂的生活！

https://stock.adobe.com/au/search?k=sisyphu
s&asset_id=279534027

Know your own strengths and limitations.
We would be happier when we compromise on our base level of God’s given, naturegiven, and genes-given well-being.

Sisyphus

If we don’t compromise, we have to fight our nature. It’s very hard to fight nature. It’s
very difficult to enhance our well-being levels as it also has to fight against nature, and
it is incredibly difficult.
Don’t go against your God-given, your nature, your genes-given!
Q: Are you pushing a rock up the hill?  This is an impossible mission/task?! Or
can you make the process more enjoyable?
(Sisyphus, in Greek mythology, who offended the Gods, was punished with rolling a
big rock up a hill and only to see it roll back down each time he almost completed his
task,  an impossible task. He was condemned to an eternity of pushing the same
rock up the same hill. Over and over, up and down—forever.)
Nature, to be commanded, must be obeyed. – Francis Bacon

瞭解自己的優勢和局限性。

當我們在上帝賜予的、自然的、基因的幸福水準上妥協時，我們會更快樂。
如果我們不妥協，我們必須與我們的本性作鬥爭。與自然作鬥爭是非常困難的。提高我們的幸福水準是非常困
難的，因為它也必須與自然作鬥爭，而且非常困難。

不要違背你上帝賜予的，你的本性，你的基因！
問自己：你是在推石頭上山嗎？這是一個不可能完成的任務？！或者問自己，你能讓這個過程更愉快嗎？
（在希臘神話中的西西弗斯冒犯了眾神，受到懲罰，要將一塊巨石推上山，每次他幾乎完成任務時，石頭就會
滾落山腳，一個不可能完成的任務。他被懲罰永遠把同一塊石頭推上同一座山。一遍又一遍，上上落落——永
無盡頭而又徒勞無功的任務!）
自然，要聽從，必須服從。–法蘭西斯·培根

Play this video in the class if time allows.

I am Me
我就是我

"I am me" by Virginia Satir. 3min vide:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KMpjs5Se_Ws&li
st=RDLVeDGGnKxLews&index=27

57

Activity: Trust Walk
1. Pair up according to your teacher’s instructions.
2. One person acts as the guide, the other as a blind person.
3. The guide leads the blind person to walk around the
classroom, run in the corridor or go up and down the stairs.
They may also go outdoors and have as ‘rich’ an experience
as possible. (Must be safe and ethical!)
4. Should you, as the blind person, feel insecure or scared and
open your eyes, you may do so. You will reflect on the
feelings later on.
5. After 5 minutes, reverse your roles.
6. Come back to the classroom in 10 minutes.
58

Post-activity Reflection
• How did you feel to be a blind person/to be the
guide?
• How well did you trust your guide? What made
trust challenging?
• Was it difficult to gain the trust of the “blind”
person? What made it difficult?
Further Reflection
What can and will you do to make yourself more
capable of trusting others?
59

Trust
• Trust means being open. It involves
willingness to disclose, but it is not just
openness for disclosure.
• Overall, trust is on the basis of the faith that
others will act in nice ways to you.
• Hence, trust also means being willing to
count on others.

60

How trusting and trustworthy are you?
Never 1-2-3-4-5-6-7 Always
1. I offer facts, give my opinions and ideas, and provide suggestions and relevant information to help the group discussion.
2. I express my willingness to cooperate with other group members and my expectations that they will also be cooperative
3. I am open and candid with my dealings with the entire group.
4. I give support to group members who are on the spot and struggling to express themselves intellectually and emotionally.
5. I keep my thoughts, ideas, feelings, and reactions to myself during group discussions. (reverse items)
6. I evaluate the contributions of other group members in terms of whether their contributions are useful to me and
whether they are right or wrong. (reverse items)
7. I take risks in expressing new ideas and current feelings during a group discussion.
8. I communicate to other group members that I am aware of, and appreciate, their abilities, talents, capabilities, skills and
resources.
9. I offer help and assistance to anyone in the group in order to bring up the performance of everyone.

10. I accept and support the openness of other group members, supporting them for taking risks and encouraging
individuality in group members.
11. I share my materials, books, sources of information, or other resources I have with the other group members in order to
promote the success of individual members and the group as a whole.
12. I often paraphrase or summarize what other members have said before I respond or comment.
13. I level with other group members.
14. I warmly encourage all members to participate, giving them recognition for their contributions, demonstrating
acceptance and openness to their ideas, and generally being friendly and responsive to them.
61

Things you can do to maintain trust
• Progressively disclosing yourself to the other person
• Making sure your behavior regarding the other person is consistent
• Following through on your commitments to the other person
• Expressing warmth and acceptance to the other person
• Being realistic about the relationship
• Being trustworthy; Being honest; Maintaining confidentiality
• Demonstrating respect using appropriate warmth, interest,
availability, and cooperation with the other person
• Avoiding being judgmental of the other person
• Using whatever social-influence power you have carefully, in the
interests of the other person
• Avoiding behavior that might indicate the presence of ulterior
62
motives, such as selfishness, superficial curiosity, or personal gain

Self-disclosure Skills
Why is self-disclosure necessary in relationship formation?

Is self-disclosure always good?
Beware of these problems:
•Flooded disclosure
•underdisclosure
•premature disclosure

63

Self-disclosure
Self-disclosure is usually defined as any information you reveal
about yourself that others are unlikely to discover from other
sources.
When and how we choose to reveal aspects of our personal
history can make a lasting impression on others. This is not an
easy task as it is not always the more, the better.
Too much disclosure is called flooded disclosure while revealing
less than our relational partners would like to hear is called
under-disclosure.
Another problem is premature disclosure, which describes the
situation when an individual reveals intimate details too quickly
and unexpectedly in a dating context that he/she is not seen as
attractive or likeable immediately.
64

Caution: Self-disclosure Involves Risk
• Self-disclosure is a building block for establishing
intimacy with others, yet it can be risky!
• Once you disclose something to someone, that person can

now share that information with others; that
person has additional power if the information is
something you’d rather not have others know.
• There is also the risk of rejection [and ridicule] when
you tell someone something that is personal.
(Beebe et al., 2011:273)

• As Powell comments (1969/1995): “If I tell you who I

am, and you do not like who I am, that is all that I
have.”
65

Caution: Self-disclosure Involves Trust
• Beware of over-self-disclosure/premature disclosure
• You might feel sorry for overdose!!
• It’s OK for us to keep some of our secrets within
ourselves!
• One of the most fundamental expectations people have
of their friends is that they will not reveal confidences
[others’ secrets]. When you say, “Oh, I won’t tell

anyone. Your secret’s safe with me,” mean it.
(Beebe et al., 2011:273)

66

Some Rules of Self Disclosure
• Begin with safe, nonrisky disclosure;
• Move from less personal to more personal information (Beebe et
al., 2011:272)

• Disclose in small doses.
• Match the level, amount, and style of the other’s disclosure;
self-disclosure is reciprocal (Beebe et al., 2011:273)
• Be appropriate to the topic and fit the flow of the conversation
• Watch listeners’ reactions
• Reserve your most important disclosure for significant,
ongoing relationships.
67

How to improve your self-esteem
• Low self-esteem can affect our communication and
interaction.
• The following techniques can help you improve how you think
about yourself and interact with others:-

• 1. Engage in self-talk:
• Realistic, positive self-talk can have a reassuring effect on
your level of self-worth and on your interactions with others.
• Conversely, repeating negative messages about your lack of
skills and ability can keep you from trying and achieving.
• (Note: Blind faith without hard work won’t

succeed. Self-talk is not a substitute for effort!) (Beebe
et al., 2011:47)

68

How to improve your self-esteem
• 2. Visualize a Positive Image of Yourself:
• Positive visualization can enhance your self-esteem.
• You can try to “see” yourself conversing effectively
with others, performing well on a project, or exhibiting
some other desirable behavior.
• Being able to visualize completing a goal (thinking
positively rather than thinking you won’t achieve your
goal) adds to your overall sense of happiness and
wellbeing.
• (Note: Visualization should be realistic and
coupled with a plan to achieve your goal!) (Beebe
et al., 2011:47-48)
69

How to improve your self-esteem
• 3. Avoid comparing yourself with others
• Rather than find others who seemingly are better off,
focus on the unique attributes that make you who
you are. Avoid judging your own value by
comparing yourself with others.
• A healthy, positive self-concept is fueled not by
judgments of others, but by a genuine sense of worth
that you recognized by yourself.
• (Beebe et al., 2011:48)

• (人比人，比死人。)
70

How to improve your self-esteem
• 4. Reframing Appropriately:
• Reframing is the process of redefining events and experiences
from a different point of view.
• reframe the event from a larger context (so that you can
have a more holistic view)
• [reframe the event from positive sides (be a benefit finder)]
• (Note: Not all negative experiences should be tossed

off and left unexamined. You can learn and profit
from your mistakes. But it is important to remember
that your worth as a human being does not depend
on a single exam grade, a single response from a
prospective employer, or a single play in a football
71
game.) (Beebe et al., 2011:48)

How to improve your self-esteem
• 5. Develop Honest Relationships:
• Having at least one other person who can help you
objectively and honestly reflect on your virtues and
vices can be extremely beneficial in fostering a
healthy, positive self-image.
• (Note: Other people play a major role in shaping
our self-concept and self-esteem.)
• (Beebe et al., 2011:49)

72

How to improve your self-esteem
• 6. Let go of the Past:
• Your self-concept is not fixed. It is not implanted at birth to
remain constant for the rest of your life.
• Individuals with low self-esteem may be fixating on events
and experiences that happened years ago and tenaciously
refusing to let go of them.
• Forgive others who have hurt you in the past
• It’s important to your own mental health and sense of wellbeing to let go of old wounds and forgive others.
• (Note: Looking back at what we can’t change only
reinforces a sense of helplessness .) (Beebe et al., 2011:49)
• You can turn your scars into stars. Let your hopes, not
your hurts, shape your future. (Pastor Robert Schuller)
73

How to improve your self-esteem
• 7. Seek Support:
• You provide social support when you express care
and concern as well as listen and empathize with
others.
• Talking with a friend  Having someone who will be
socially supportive is especially important when we
experience stress and anxiety or are faced with a
vexing personal problem.
• (Beebe et al., 2011:49)

74

10 important insights for self
confidence from Marcus Aurelius.

Play this video in class if time
allows.
Marcus Aurelius - How To Build
Your Self Confidence (Stoicism)

16-min video:
https://www.youtube.com/wa
tch?v=yxcFKtupjL4

01. Focus on building your character
02. Practice Self-Acceptance
03. Focus on your thoughts
04. Make a plan and stop thinking
05. Keep your word
06. Take ownership of your actions
07. Don’t speak too much about yourself
08. Remind yourself of death
09. Ignore the naysayers
10. Have an evening confidence ritual

75

3 Good Things

Marcus Aurelius - How To Build
Your Self Confidence (Stoicism)

16-min video:
https://www.youtube.com/wa
tch?v=yxcFKtupjL4

76

宋慧喬節目上談離婚低潮，五年才學會愛自己！
靠這5個方法走出困境：睡前感恩練習
Yahoo Style 2025年1月14日週二
https://hk.news.yahoo.com/%E5%AE%8B%E6%85%A7%E5%96%AC-%E9%9B%A2%E5%A9%9A-%E4%BD%8E%E6%BD%AE%E6%84%9B%E8%87%AA%E5%B7%B1-%E6%84%9F%E6%81%A9-%E7%B7%B4%E7%BF%92-023046034.html

宋慧喬為宣傳新電影作客劉在錫的節目《劉QUIZ》，大談這些年來的心路歷程。大家熱議的除了她那出道多年來不變的
美貌，還有節目中她首談對於過去的低潮時刻，應該如何調適心情。
宋慧喬一直是韓劇收視率的保證，演技好、人也溫婉有氣質，在2017年跟宋仲基舉行了世紀婚禮，原以為會有童話故事
般的結尾，卻在2019年離婚收場。之後的宋慧喬沒有被這件事打倒，用5年時間學會了「愛自己」！「愛自己」是人生
的課題，說起來簡單，但要真正執行卻也有難度，大家也處於困境或低潮中嗎？這篇文章將會教大家簡單從生活中「
愛自己」的5種方法，或許可以給你一些力量。

懂得愛自己，將自己的感受擺在首要位置，才有辦法給別人更多的愛 [5 Love Languages: Love Bank/Tank] ，但要如何愛自己
呢？宋慧喬一開始也很迷茫，她連方法都不知道，通過好友編劇盧熙京的分享，她懂得了並且堅持整整5年，學會了愛
自己。從談話節目中大家也看到了宋慧喬強大堅定的一面！以下介紹的五種方法中也有宋慧喬提及的兩種「愛自己」
方法，大家不妨參考一下吧！
愛自己方法1. 早上自我肯定 [Positive self-talk]

每天早上對著鏡子微笑，對自己說一些鼓勵的話，例如「我值得被愛」或「我今天會做得很好」，心理暗示自己接下
來的一整天都會很順利。很多時候我們會因外界的聲音，或者內在的批判而產生出「自己不夠好」的信息，但對著鏡
子微笑的這一過程中可以審視自己的表情，加上精神喊話，會令自己越來越自信。提提大家，一開始可能會不習慣，
但久了之後學會接納自己，自己的內心會越來越穩定強大。
愛自己方法2. 睡前感恩練習 [The 3 Good Things Practice – Positive Psychology]
睡前寫下三件讓你感到感激的事情，這有助於提升正面情緒。宋慧喬在節目中也分享了這種方法，是好友編劇盧熙京
要她每天寫下感謝的事。一開始宋慧喬也不知道每天值得感恩的事情有什麼，直到好友分享，原來今天天氣好值得感
恩、沒有挨餓，能夠吃飽飯值得感恩、家裡的寵物健康也很值得感恩，每天發生的好事其實有很多，只不過大家都著
77
眼於令自己不開心的事情中，忽略了這些日常小事。這個方法也是教大家將自己的感受擺在第一位，聆聽自己內心的
聲音。

宋慧喬節目上談離婚低潮，五年才學會愛自己！靠
這5個方法走出困境：睡前感恩練習
Yahoo Style 2025年1月14日週二 https://hk.news.yahoo.com/%E5%AE%8B%E6%85%A7%E5%96%AC%E9%9B%A2%E5%A9%9A-%E4%BD%8E%E6%BD%AE-%E6%84%9B%E8%87%AA%E5%B7%B1-%E6%84%9F%E6%81%A9%E7%B7%B4%E7%BF%92-023046034.html

愛自己方法3. 進行運動 [Exercise is a psychiatric dream drug but without side effects.]
每日至少進行30分鐘的運動，例如散步、瑜伽或健身，這不僅有助於身體健康，也能提升心情。有研究表明
運動會刺激大腦分泌腦內啡（Endorphin），令人愉悅很放鬆，規律的運動更有助於減輕壓力、提升自信心。大
家不妨在新一年訂下運動健身計畫吧，讓自己無論內在還是外在，都成為更好的人！自然也會更欣賞自己，
更愛自己。
愛自己方法4. 與支持你的人交流 [Communicate with/seek help from supportive people/stress buffer theory: social support (a
protective factor) moderates the negative effect of stress]
每天花時間與支持你的人在一起，可以是朋友、伴侶或者家人，分享你的感受和經歷，同時獲得對方的回饋
，能激發出正向的能量和支持，讓你更加堅定自己的目標。在遇到挫折，有人生難題不知道如何解時，支持
你的人會鼓勵你，甚至分擔你的壓力。宋慧喬也是及時向身邊支持的朋友編劇盧熙京交流，才獲得了重新愛
上自己的方法。
愛自己方法5. 學會說「不」[Assertiveness training: Say no, without feeling guilty]
學會說「不」設立界線，避免讓自己陷入不必要的壓力或人際關係中。這件事情看起來簡單，做起來超級難
。很多人不想得罪別人，或者想贏得他人的好感只好勉強自己做能力範圍外的事，其實過度承擔別人的要求
可能導致身心疲憊和壓力，長久以來會忽略自己內在的需求，甚至影響心理健康。學會說「不」並不代表自
私，如同上述所說的，將自己的感受擺在第一位，才有辦法給別人更多的愛。
78

通過以上這些簡單的練習，大家可以慢慢培養對自己的愛與更關懷自己，讓自己變得更加幸福與滿足。

Conclusion
• To build relationship – especially a long-lasting one – you
need to be appropriately open.
• Openness is built on positive coherent self concepts, and on
positive views on others.
• It is noteworthy that self concepts and view on others are
evolved through interaction with others. Constantly selfevaluate (dependent self-esteem)/ other oriented
• Therefore, keep trying to interact with others and learn from
experience!
79

The Platinum Rule
• Do not do unto yourself what you would not do unto
others  don’t be a perfectionist (too

critical to or over demanding on
yourself) but give yourself the
permission to be human (Tal Ben-Shahar, 2011:200)
• 善待自己 (treat yourself nicely)
80

The Golden Rule
• The Golden Rule: Not do unto others as we would
not have done unto ourselves. [己所不欲，勿施於
人]
• It is with our neighbor that the Golden Rule is concerned.
• What about ourselves?

• The Golden Rule takes the love of self for
granted—the self is used as the standard for the
love of others, how we treat the “I” as the standard
for how we ought to treat our fellow men and
women.
81
• (Ben-Shahar, 2011:199)

The Platinum Rule
• Diane Ackerman points out: “No one can live up to
perfection, and most of us do not often expect it of
others; but we are more demanding with ourselves.”
(Diane Ackerman in Ben-Shahar, 2011:199)  Double standard!
• Ben-Shahar proposes to add a new rule – the Platinum
Rule to our moral code: “Do not do unto yourself
what you would not do unto others.” (Ben-Shahar,
2011:199)

• Don’t be overly critical of yourself, but grant
yourself the permission to be human, to accept your
own humanity and thus your fallibility
• Note: Self-hate  Self-esteem

82

The Platinum Rule

Love
(Willard Harley)

Loving others presupposes loving oneself.
Philosopher and author Ayn Rand puts it:

“To say ‘I love you’ one must first be able to say the ‘I.’” (Ben-Shahar,
2011:202)

Deposit love to your own “love bank”!
“Unless we learn how to love ourselves, we will encounter difficulties in
loving others and allowing them to love us. We cannot give to others what
we do not possess ourselves. If we are able to appreciate our own worth, then
we are better able to accept love from others.”
Corey & Corey (2010:174) observed:

Corey & Corey (2010:174) remind us:

“Loving ourselves does not mean having an exaggerated
picture of our own importance or placing ourselves above
others or at the centre of the universe. Rather, it means having
respect for ourselves even though we are imperfect. It entails
caring about our lives and striving to become the people we want
to be.” self-love is a condition of love for others

https://www.facebook.com/ThinkP
ositivePower/photos/taking-careof-yourselfdoesnt-mean-me-firstitmeans-me-toodont-forget-to-takeca/2470345153016450/

83

Felice Leonardo Buscaglia (March 31, 1924 – June 12,
1998), also known as "Dr. Love", was an American
author, motivational speaker, and a professor in the
Department of Special Education at the University of
Southern California.(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leo_Buscaglia)
Wayne Walter Dyer (May 10, 1940 – August 29,
2015) was an American self-help author and
motivational speaker.
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wayne_Dyer)

You can only give what you
have from within. So, fill
yourself with good things!
Deposit love into your love
bank!
Practise “3 Good Things”
exercise every day
Apply the strengths 84
perspective on yourself!
https://www.knowledgelove.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Quotes-of-Mother-Teresa-10-1024x576.jpg

Being known versus validated (David Schnarch, 1997)
– Express, not impress - a healthy relationship is a notion of
being known rather than validated, expressing rather than
impressing, being open, and revealing our weaknesses,
strengths, desires, passions, fears and insecurities.  permit

ourselves to be human

Life becomes so much lighter, so much easier,
and so much more exciting when we are about
expressing ourselves, being known rather than
being validated, whether it is with our romantic partner,
our family, our friends, our colleagues, our class, the
foundation of the growth of intimacy, and passion in long term
relationships. (Tal Ben-Shahar)
(We will talk more about this in Session 8 – Intimate relationship.)

85

References
Branden, N. (1994).The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem. New York: Bantam.
Beebe, S. A., Beebe, S. J., & Redmond, M. V. (2011). Interpersonal
communication: relating to others. Boston: Ally & Bacon.
Ben-Shahar, Tal. (2007). Happier: learn the secrets to daily joy and lasting
fulfillment. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ben-Shahar, Tal. (2011). The pursuit of perfect: how to stop chasing
perfection and start living a richer, happier life. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Brown, Brene. (2010). The gifts of imperfection : let go of who you think
you're supposed to be and embrace who you are. Center City, Minn. :
Hazelden.
• Burger, J. M. (2008). Ch 11. The Humanistic Approach: Theory, Application,
and Assessment. Personality (7th ed., pp. 292-296). Australia:
Thomson/Wadsworth.
• Corey, G., & Corey, M. S. (2010). I never knew I had a choice: explorations
in personal growth (9th edition). Australia: Brooks/Cole.
• Corey, G., & Corey, M. S. (2014). I never knew I had a choice: explorations
in personal growth (10th edition). Australia: Brooks/Cole.
• Davidson, L., Rakfeldt, J., & Strauss, J. (2010). The root of the recovery
movement in psychiatry: lessons learned. West Sussex, UK: John Wiley86 &
Sons, Ltd.

References
Deutsch, M. (1962). Cooperation and trust: Some theoretical notes. In M. R.
Jones (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (pp. 275-319). Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.
Johnson, D. W. (2006). Ch 3. Developing and maintaining Trust. Reaching
out: interpersonal effectiveness and self-actualization (9th ed., pp. 93-122).
Boston: Pearson A & B.
•Luft, J. (1969). Of human interaction. Palo Alto, Calif.: National Press
Books.
•May, Rollo. (1953). Man’s search for himself. New York: W. W. Norton
& Company, Inc.
•Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2011). Abnormal psychology (5th ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
•Peterson C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2004). Character Strengths and
Virtues: A Handbook and Classification. Washington, DC, American
Psychological Association.
•Powell, John. (1969/1995). Why am I afraid to tell you who I am?:
insights on self-awareness, personal growth and interpersonal
communication. London : Fount
87

References
• Resnick, S. G., & Rosenheck, R. A. (2006). Recovery and Positive
Psychology: Parallel Themes and Potential Synergies. Psychiatric Services,
57(1), 120-122.
• Trenholm, S., & Jensen, A. (2008). Ch 8. Self Competence. Interpersonal
communication (6th ed., pp. 217-220). New York: Oxford University Press.
• Yang, K. S. (1995). Chinese social orientation: An integrative analysis. In
T. Y. Lin, W. S. Tseng, & E. K. Yeh (Eds.), Chinese societies and mental
health (pp. 19-39). Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
• 陳裕娟 (Estella Chan)(2006) 。 “社工是否需要處理好自己的問題才可
以幫助別人？” 刊於甘炳光、陳偉道、文錦燕編。《堅守信念--給社
工學生的30封信》 (Hold On to Your Faith—30 Letters to Social Work
Students)。香港：香港城市大學出版社。(頁 180-187)。

88

