GE2223
Interpersonal Skills
and
Positive Personal
Development
Sessions 8
Intimate relationship

Concepts to Learn
– Authentic Love /Components of Love
– Mate selection
– The Stimulus-Value-Role Exchange Principle
– Relationship beliefs and values
(i.e., beliefs and values about love)
– Style of Love
– Triangular Theory of Love
– Five Love Languages
– Coping with ending a long-term relationship

Activity

• Choose 5 of the below items which are important to you
regarding love. Then find as many as possible people in the
classroom who share at least 3 common items with you.
You desire your lover to (be)…
Love you

Care about you

See you as No.1

Admire you

Physically
attractive

Honest

Popular with others Humorous

Dependable

Act maturely

Kind

Have similar
interests

Think in similar ways Hold the same
as you do
religious beliefs

Have similar values

Is considerate

In good physical
health

Educated

Not too poor

Approved by my
parents / friends

Love children

Does not smoke

Willing to share
housework

Independent

What do you learn from this activity?

Choosing a Mate
Below are a number of specific qualities that some people think are important
to consider in picking a mate. Check how important they are to you.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

Loves you
Is popular with others
Honest
Is physically attractive
Has same religious beliefs
Respects your parents
Acts own age; not childish
Does not smoke
Is dependable
Willing to share the
housework
Good personality
Has similar interest
Is in good physical health

• Is about same intelligence as I
• Has about same amount of
schooling
• Has ideals similar to mine
• Is considerate of me and others
• Has pleasant disposition, sense
of humor
• Is better than average wage
earner and/or housekeeper
• Is approved by my parents
• Mixes well in social situations
• Desires children
• Is close to my age
• Belongs to my race or ethnic
group

Rules of dating
The following rules are endorsed as the most important ones
to apply to the partner in the dating relationship.
• Address the other by first •
name.
•
• Respect the other's privacy.
• Show mutual trust.
•
• Be punctual.
•
• Look the other person in the •
eye during conversation.
•
• Don't criticise each other in •
public.
•
• Stand up for the other
•
person in his/her absence.
•

Keep confidence.
Show interest in each other's daily
activities.
Be faithful to one other.
Share news of success.
Give birthday cards and presents.
Be tolerant of each other's friends.
Repay debts, favours & compliments.
Touch the other person intentionally.
Surprise each other with gifts.
Boys should initiate a date.

Mate Selection Process
According to The Stimulus- Value-Role Exchange Principle:

Stimulus Stage
Being attracted to each other
physically and psychologically

Value Stage
Evaluating compatibility of values

Role Stage
Checking how values are expressed
in role behaviors

The Stimulus- Value- Role Exchange Principle
• Most couples pass through three stages before the
marriage- the stimulus, value, and role stages.
Stimulus Stage
• According to this exchange principle, the couple is first
attracted to each other by their physical attractiveness
and social qualities. This is the stimulus stage. If each
partner feels that the balance sheet is about equal
concerning such qualities as good looks, attractive
personality, and social skills, they are more likely to
be pleased with the relationship and want to continue it.
• If that balance sheet is very uneven, the relationship is
likely to be terminated.

The Stimulus- Value- Role Exchange Principle
Value Stage
• If the couples are evenly matched in the stimulus stage,
they may proceed into the value stage and test the
compatibility of their values.
• The more similar and mutually pleasing their values
are, the stronger their attraction becomes.

The Stimulus- Value- Role Exchange Principle
Role Stage
• If the exchange in the value stage is very positive and
fairly equal, the couple may move into the role stage.
• The couple at this stage can see how the values are
expressed in role behavior and real life situations.
They observe how optimistic, dependable, or selfish
each one is.
• If the balance sheet of mutual benefit at this stage is
positive and approximately equal, the couple may
choose to enter into marriage.

Mate Selection Process
According to The Stimulus- Value-Role Exchange Principle:
Logically speaking if there is value
conflict you have several options:
1. Change your values
2. Change your lover’s values
3. Change your lover

Is it possible to change
your values? How?

Value Stage
Evaluating compatibility of values
A fourth option is to keep your
values but adjust your behaviors

What is your choice?

Poor Mate Selection
Omitting stages in the mate selection process
•
Their attraction for each other is so strong that they do not go
through the other stages. This may lead to marriage early in the
relationship without developing enough mutual
understanding of the ways in which they are compatible, and
result in discovering after the wedding that they have
different ideas and tastes.
Lack of emphasis upon being the right partner
•
The desire to find a mate who is right for ourselves may
mask the importance of choosing one for whom we will be
the right partner.
•
These questions should be considered: can you put yourself in
your partner’s place and see things from his or her point of
view? Do you make this person feel good about himself or
herself? [Remember to be other-oriented!]

Poor Mate Selection
Playing a false role and camouflaging needs
• One frequent difficulty in mate selection is the
attempt to camouflage real needs while dating.
People put on fronts and assume roles that do not
reveal their real feelings. [Putting on a mask!
Pretending/acting/impressing, not revealing/being!]
•

•

For example, two persons act self-confidently and
strongly on the outside but feel uncertain, helpless
and frightened on the inside may think that the
other is a strong person who can take care of
him/her.
After marriage, each finds the other is not the strong
person for which he or she hopes. Frustration,
disappointment, and anger are bound to result.

Wise Mate Selection
1. Know yourself
–
–
–
–
–

What are your most important needs?
Do you need lots of attention and want others to admire you?
What type of person do you seem most compatible with?
Why?
Why do you wish to marry?
What do you expect of your spouse and of yourself?

2. Know the prospective marriage partner
–
–
–
–

What kind of person is your prospective partner?
What are his/her major values?
Are those values compatible with yours?
Do you feel comfortable together?

Wise Mate Selection
3. Consider the effects of the relationship
–
–

–

Does the relationship bring out the best in both of you?
Can you promote each other's welfare and happiness in
the future?
What will the relationship be like 10 years from now?

4. Examine the compatibility
–
–

Are your needs, personalities, attitudes, experience, etc.
similar or complementary, or both?
If incompatibilities exist, are they ones that you can
accept and live with?

Wise Mate Selection
5. Consider the psychological comfortableness factor
– Do you feel at ease with your prospective mate?
– Can you be yourself and act naturally around
him/her or do you feel you must maintain a certain
image?
– Do you feel free to confide in each other?
– Do you trust each other?
– Do you feel confident that your prospective partner
is committed to you?

Scenario
After 1 year of dating with your lover, you see
a larger and larger discrepancy between you.
Argument is getting frequent. You believe you
have done your best, and you try hard to be
understanding, but your lover doesn’t seem to
appreciate much. You treasure this relationship,
and yet you hate having to argue all the time.
You are really exhausted by such struggle.

Role-Play
Today, your lover is starting an
argument again. Apply the skills of
perspective taking and empathy to
role-play the argument.
(Additional information on next slide)
Role-play the scenario according to your
teacher’s instructions.

Boyfriend’s Perspective
Your girlfriend has been demanding
attention from you endlessly. She keeps calling,
checking what you are doing, telling you to do
this and do that. You tolerate it because you
love her, and you tried to let her understand
you need private time, but it does not improve
anything. Today, you just tell her you have a big
project to do and therefore you will not see her
until the next weekend, she bursts into rage
and blame you for being cold to her…

Girlfriend’s Perspective
Your boyfriend has been unresponsive to you.
You know he is under stress, so you have tried
to show care and concern about his health to
relieve his stress. But he seems uninterested
and is unwilling to share anything with you, and
yet you tolerate it for the sake of love. To cheer
him up, you beg friends of friends to get you
two concert tickets and plan to go with him this
weekend, but he tells you he will not see you
until the next weekend…

Self-Reflection
• What are your values about love? What are those
held by your partner? How are they different?
• Do value differences always cause conflicts?
• What are your usual (perhaps automatic) reactions
to conflicts? Do they help resolve conflicts?
• Do you usually understand the roots of conflicts
(and hence know the problem to solve)?

Love
Attitude

What kind of lover are you?
Administer the questionnaire:
The Love attitudes scale: Short Form

Love Attitude
• In 1973 John Lee used the color wheel to describe his theory of love,
in his book, The Colors of Love.
• Primary Love Styles are Eros, Ludos and Storge
• Secondary Love Styles Mix the Primary Styles
• Mixing eros with ludos creates mania, or obsessive love, that can feel
like a roller-coaster ride and include bouts of jealousy and
possessiveness. Mixing ludos with storge creates pragma, which is
realistic and practical love, like when partners are chosen because
they're "good on paper." And mixing eros with storge creates agape,
which is selfless love, often experienced as spiritual love.
• Clyde and Susan Hendrick continued to research love styles and
developed the Love Attitude Scales, a test you can take to determine
your love style, and the love style of your relationship.

Love Attitude
What kind of lover are you?
• 1. Eros: Beauty and Sexuality
• Has an idealized image of beauty that is unattainable in reality. It is a
highly sensual style of love. Erotic lovers choose their lovers by
intuition or "chemistry." They are more likely to say they fell in love
at first sight than those of other love styles.
• The advantage of erotic love is the sentimentality of it. It is very
relaxing to the person doing it. The disadvantage is the inevitability of
the decay in attraction, and the danger of living in a fantasy world.
Consequently, they often feel unfulfilled.
• 2. Ludus: Entertainment and Excitement
• Ludic lovers are players. Love is experienced as a game, as fun.
• A ludic lover is self-controlled, always aware of the need to manage
love rather than allow it to be in control. They are more interested in
quantity than quality of relationships.
• Sexual fidelity is not important. They regard sex as a conquest or a
sport, and they engage in relationships because they see them as a
challenge.

Love Attitude
What kind of lover are you?
• 3. Storge: Peaceful and Slow
• Storgic lovers are friends first. They don’t set out to find lovers but to
establish a companionable relationship.
• Storgic lovers choose their mates based on homogamy, and sometimes
cannot pinpoint the moment that friendship turned to love. Storgic
lovers want their significant others to also be their best friends. Love is a
gradual process of unfolding thoughts and feelings.
• The advantage of storgic love is the level of intimacy between the
partners. The disadvantage is the lack of passion

• 4. Pragma: Practical and Traditional
• Pragmatic lovers think rationally and realistically about their
expectations in a partner, and select them via comparison shopping or
shopping-list love. They want compatibility in their partner and also
concerned with social qualifications.
• Pragmatic lovers want to find value in their partners, and ultimately
want to work with their partner to reach a common goal.
• The advantage of pragmatic love is practicality and realism. The
disadvantage is un-demonstrativeness and lack of emotion.

Love Attitude
What kind of lover are you?
• 5. Mania: Elation and Depression
• Manic lovers often have low self-esteem, and place much
importance on their relationship. Manic lovers speak of their
partners in possessives and superlatives, and feel they "need"
their partners. They often experience extreme highs and extreme
lows.
• Manic lovers will avoid committing infidelity if they fear
discovery. They view marriage as ownership, and children as
either competition or a substitute for their lover. Sex is a
reassurance of love. Manic lovers are often anxious or insecure,
and can be extremely jealous. They love intensely and worries
intensely about losing the lover.
• The advantage of manic love is intensity. The disadvantages
include jealousy, possessiveness, and insatiability.

Love Attitude
What kind of lover are you?
• 6. Agape: Compassionate and Selfless
• Agapic love is self-sacrificing, all-encompassing love. Agapic
lovers are often spiritual or religious people. Agapic lovers
view their partners as blessings, and wish to take care of them.
They sometimes love even people with whom they have no
close ties.
• Agapic lovers will remain faithful to their partners to avoid
causing them pain, and will often wait patiently for their
partners after a break-up. Love is spiritual, and that they offer
without concern for personal reward or gain.
• The advantage of agapic love is its generosity. A disadvantage
is that it can induce feelings of guilt or incompetence in a
partner. (Beebe et al., 2011:323-324; Greenberg, 2013:83-84)

Relationship Beliefs
Relationship beliefs is what you see as the
truth about relationship.
Love means being cared about.

I shall be treated as No.1 to be loved.
One shall make sacrifice for love.
Love means respect for autonomy.

If you love a person making the
person happy is your responsibility.
Relationship works only with
communication.

Relationship Beliefs
Do you mind
confronting your beliefs?

Is it possible to change
your values? How?

Love means being cared about.
I shall be treated as No.1 to be loved.
One shall make sacrifice for love.
Love means respect for autonomy.
If you love a person making the person happy
is your responsibility.

Relationship works only with communication.

Authentic Love
• Love means that I am coming to know the person I love. I
am aware of the many facets of the other person – not
just the beautiful side but also the limitations,
inconsistencies, and flaws. I have an awareness of the
other’s feelings and thoughts, and I experience
something of the depth of that person. I can penetrate
masks and roles and see the other person on a deeper
level. (Corey & Corey, 2014:181)

• Love also entails making myself known to the other
person. Meaningful self-disclosure is essential to
establishing loving relationships, especially revealing the
deeper facets of ourselves. (Corey & Corey, 2014:181)

Authentic Love
• Love means that I care about the welfare of the
person I love and I actively demonstrate concern
for the other.
• If I care about you, I am concerned about your
growth, and I hope you will become all that you
can be.
• We have an interest in each other’s welfare and a
desire to see that the other person is fulfilled.
(Corey & Corey, 2014:181)

Authentic Love
• Love means having respect for the dignity of the
person I love.
• If I love you, I can see you as a separate person,
with your own values and thoughts and
feelings, and I do not insist that you surrender
your identity and conform to an image of what I
expect you to be for me.
• I am not threatened by your ability to stand
alone and to be who you are.
• I avoid treating you as an object or using you
primarily to gratify my needs.
• (Corey & Corey, 2014:181)

Authentic Love
• Love means having a responsibility towards the person I
love but not responsibility for that person.
• If I love you, I am responsive to what you need.
• I am aware that what I am and what I do affects you; I am
concerned about your happiness and your sadness. I
have the realization that I have the capacity to hurt or
neglect you. (Corey & Corey, 2014:181)
• “True love includes a sense of responsibility and
accepting the other person as he or she is, with all
strengths and weaknesses. If you like only the best things
in a person, that is not love.” (Nhat Hanh, 1992:85in Corey & Corey,
2010:176)

• Authentic love implies accepting another person’s
weaknesses and bringing patience and understanding to
help the person make significant life changes. (Corey &
Corey, 2014:1182)

Authentic Love
• Love can lead to grow for the both the person I
love and me.
• If I love you, I am growing as a result of my love
for you. You encourage me to become more fully
what I might be, and my love enhances your
being as well.
• We each grow as a result of caring and being
cared for;
• we each share in an enriching experience that
does not detract from our being. (Corey & Corey,
2014:182)

Authentic Love
• Love means making a commitment to the person I
love.
• This means that the people involved have invested
in their future together and that they are willing to
stay with each other in times of crisis and
conflict.
• Commitment entails a willingness to stay with each
other in times of pain, uncertainty, struggle, and
despair, as well as in times of calm and enjoyment.
• A major component of commitment is to give
honest feedback to the one we love, even though it
may be difficult to give and to hear. (Corey & Corey,
2014:182)

Authentic Love
• Love means that I am vulnerable.
• Love involves allowing you to matter to me in
spite of my fear of losing you. You have the
capacity to hurt me as much as I am capable of
hurting you.
• There are no guarantees that our love will
endure.
• My love for you implies that I want to spend time
with you and share meaningful aspects of my life
with you. (Corey & Corey, 2014:182)

Authentic Love
• Love means trusting the person you love. If I love you, I
trust you will accept my caring and my love and that you
will not deliberately hurt me. I trust that you will find me
lovable and that you want to be with me. I trust the
reciprocal nature of our love. If we trust each other, we are
willing to be open to each other and can shed masks and
pretenses and reveal our true selves. (Corey & Corey, 2014:182)
• Love means trusting yourself. In relationships a great deal
is made of trusting the person you love, yet the ability to
trust yourself is equally important. Indeed, if your trust in
yourself wavers, you may not be able to believe or trust
in the love another wants to share with you. (Corey & Corey,
2014:182)

Authentic Love
• Love allows for imperfection.
• Authentic love does not imply a perfect state of
happiness. (Corey & Corey, 2014:182)
• Love is freely given. My love for you is not
contingent on whether you fulfill my expectations of
you. (Corey & Corey, 2014:183)
• Authentic love does not mean “I’ll love you when
you become perfect or when you become what I
expect you to become.” (Corey & Corey, 2014:183)
• Authentic love is not given with strings attached.
There is unconditional quality about love. (Corey &
Corey, 2014:183)

Authentic Love
• Love is expansive. If I love you, I encourage you to reach
out and develop other relationships.
• Only a false love cements one person to another in such
a way that he or she is not given room to have other
meaningful relationships. (Corey & Corey, 2014:183)
• Love means that although I want you in my life, I am
capable of functioning without you.
• If life is meaningless without you, it will put a lot of
demands on you to be there for me.
• If I love you and you leave, I will experience a great loss,
but I will not be destroyed.
• If I am overly dependent on you for my meaning and my
survival, I am not free to challenge our relationship, and
this is hardly a healthy sign of love. (Corey & Corey, 2014:183)

Authentic Love
• Love means identifying with the person I love. If I love you,
I can empathize with you, see the world through your eyes,
and identify with you. (Corey & Corey, 2014:183)
• Love involves seeing the potential within the person I love.
If I love you, I am able to see you as the person you can
become, while still accepting who you are now. (Corey & Corey,
2014:183)

• Love means letting go of the illusion of total control of
ourselves, others, and our environment. The more I strive
for complete control, the more out of control I am. Loving
implies a surrender of control and being open to life’s
events. It implies the capacity to be surprised. (Corey & Corey,
2014:183)

Five Major Components of Love
• Care - We are concerned about the persons we
love, wishing to promote their well-being and
happiness, wanting the best for them, and
wanting them to grow and develop in a positive
manner.
• Responsibility - We behave responsibly toward
those we love. We do not hurt them by acting
irresponsibly. This responsibility does not come
from a sense of obligation; rather, it is willing
sensitivity and responsiveness to the needs of
others.

Five Major Components of Love
• Respect - A basic component of love is respect. Respect
involves "looking at" someone closely enough to be
aware of his or her needs and feelings; it communicates
an interest in the other person and involves accepting
him or her as a unique individual.

• Knowledge - We gain an awareness of the needs, values,
goals, and feelings of the person we love. With this
knowledge comes an understanding of the loved one.
We can know people on a superficial level or we can
know them more deeply. For example, you may know
that your friend is irritable and moody today; on a
deeper level you may know it is the result of studying
for a big test, feeling a great deal of pressure, and having
had too little sleep.

Five Major Components of Love
• Commitment - Love involves a conscious
decision to be committed to the other person. To
be committed means promoting the welfare,
happiness and growth of the other person and is
vital to the growth of trust and security in the
relationship.
• *adapted from Stinnett N., Walters J., Kaye E., (1991),
Relationships in Marriage and Family (2nd ed.), U.S.A.:
Macmillan Publishing company.
• Cameron, S. (2000), Playing the Love Market: Dating,
Romance and Real World. London: Free Association
Books.

The Triangular Theory of Love
This theory suggests that all loving relationships can be
described according to 3 dimensions: Intimacy, Passion, and
Decision/Commitment (Beebe et al., 2011:322)
~ Sternberg's Theory of Love: Intimacy, Commitment, Passion

~5 min video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cxq7ZmnFLU
Intimacy

Passion

Decision/
commitment

Sternberg's Triangular Theory of Love and its
Types - The Simplest Explanation Ever
~11 ½-min video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xaseysi3KZk
If you want to learn more about Sternberg’s Love theory, watch this video in class.

Components of Love
1. Intimacy
Intimacy refers to close, connected, and bonded feeling in
loving relationship. Signs of intimacy include:• desiring to promote the welfare of the loved one.
• experiencing happiness with the loved ones.
• having high regard for the loved one.
• being able to count on the loved one in times of needs.
• mutual understanding with the loved one.
• sharing one's self and one's possessions with the loved one.
• receiving emotional support for the loved one.
• giving emotional support to the loved one.
• having intimate communication with the loved one.
• valuing the loved one in one's life.

Components of Love
2. Passion
Passion refers to the drives that lead to romance,
physical attraction, sexual consummation, and the like
in a relationship.
Sex may form the main part of the passion but it may
also include:• self-esteem
• affiliation with others
• dominance over others
• submission to others
• self-actualization

Components of Love
3. Decision/Commitment
Short-term decision/commitment: one decides to
love someone.

Long-term decision/commitment: one commits to
maintain the love to someone.
– Decision will precede commitment
– Decision and commitment component of love do
not necessarily go together.

Different Combination of Love
Liking (Intimacy
only)
Romantic love
(Intimacy +
Passion)

Consummate
love

Companionate love
(Intimacy +
Commitment)

(I+P+C)
Infatuation
(Passion
alone)

Fatuous love
(Passion +
Commitment)

Empty love
(Decision/
commitment
alone)

The relative emphasis of each component changes over time
as an adult romantic relationship develops.
Liking
• includes only intimacy
• characterizes true friendships,
• a warmth, and
• a closeness with another
• but not intense passion or long-term commitment
Infatuated love
• consists solely of passion
• what is felt as “love at first sight”
• without the intimacy and the commitment components of
love
• infatuated love may disappear suddenly.

Romantic love
• is a combination of intimacy and passion. Romantic
lovers are bonded emotionally (as in liking), &
physically through passionate arousal
Companionate love
• consists of intimacy (friendship) and commitment
• This type of love is often found in marriages in which
the passion has gone out of the relationship, but a deep
affection & commitment remain.
• Companionate love is generally a personal relation you
build with somebody you share your life with, but with
no sexual or physical desire.
• It is stronger than friendship because of the extra
element of commitment.
• ??? Platonic love????

Fatuous love
• has the passion and the commitment components
• but not the intimacy component.
• This type of love can be exemplified by a whirlwind
courtship and
• marriage in which a commitment is motivated largely by
passion,
• without the stabilizing influence of intimacy.

Consummate love
• includes all three components –intimacy, passion and
commitment.
• is the most complete form of love,
• it represents the ideal love relationship for which many
people strive but which apparently few achieve.
•
•
•
•

References
Corey, G., & Corey, M. S. (2014). I never knew I had a
choice: explorations in personal growth (10th edition).
Australia: Brooks/Cole.
Sternberg, R. J. (1986) A triangular theory of love. Psychological
Review, 93, 119-135.
Sternberg, R. J. (1988) The Triangle of Love: Intimacy, Passion,
Commitment, Basic Books

https://5lovelanguages.com/learn

Gary Chapman

Gary Chapman

The 5 Love Languages Explained
Show this video in class if time allows
~6-min video: https://youtu.be/doRMsjoDevY

The 5 Love Languages
1: Words of Affirmation: uses words to affirm other people;
negative or insulting comments cut deep — and won't be easily forgiven

2: Quality Time: giving your undivided attention
3: Receiving Gifts: a meaningful or thoughtful present makes others
feel appreciated

4: Acts of Service: actions speak louder than words; Lending a
helping hand shows you really care

5: Physical Touch: everyday physical connections, like hand-holding,
kissing, or any type of re-affirming physical contact is greatly appreciated

Love Bank (愛的銀行)
Love

In his book “His Needs, Her needs: Building an Affair-Proof
Marriage,” Dr. Willard Harley taught the concept of the
LOVE BANK. Usually, deposits are made bit by bit, but when
a withdrawal happens, it can drain the bank or go into a
negative balance.

愛的銀行：每個人的心靈裡
都有個愛的情感帳戶
存款：讓對方開心，覺得被
欣賞，肯定或感受到愛
提款：讓對方痛苦，覺得被
批評，被誤解或傷害
存款豐厚：愛能遮掩罪，使
大事化小，小事化無
債臺高築：任何小錯都可變
大罪

Love Bank: Everyone has an emotional
account of love in their hearts
Deposit: Make the other person happy,
feel appreciated, affirmed or feel loved
Withdrawal: make the other person
suffer, feel criticized, misunderstood or
hurt
Rich deposits: love can cover up sin,
make big things small, and make small
things into nothing
High deficit: any small mistake can
become a major sin

How To Affair Proof Your Marriage | His Needs Her Needs
Book Review [By Willard Harley]
~7-min video: https://youtu.be/QiXBeUtmUNU

In his book “His Needs, Her
needs: Building an Affair-Proof
Marriage,” Dr. Willard Harley
taught the concept of the LOVE
BANK. Usually, deposits are
made bit by bit, but when a
withdrawal happens, it can drain
the bank or go into a negative
balance.

The Five Love
Language

Words of
Affirmation

Note: You must deposit love to your
own love bank before you can withdraw
some to give to others  love yourself so
that you can love others!

Love Bank

Acts of Service
Quality Time

Physical Touch

Receiving Gifts

https://5lovelanguages.com/quizzes/love-language

https://5lovelanguages.com/quizzes/l
ove-language

發掘出屬於自己的「愛的語言」
https://refresh.bokss.org.hk/tc/fivelove-language-test

Coping with ending a long-term
relationship

• A breakup or loss of a friend, or significant other can lead
to feelings of pain, anger, and grief. Some attitudes you can
assume, and some behaviors you can choose that are likely
to help you work through these feelings. Here are some
suggestions for dealing effectively with the termination of a
meaningful relationship:-

1. Allow yourself to grieve
• You will likely experience a range of feelings, including
sadness, anger, guilt, loss, pain, joy over certain memorable
times, and relief. Although grieving can be both
overwhelming and painful, the alternative of denying your
feelings will keep you from being able to move on and
could cause you to have intimacy problems later. (Corey &
Corey, 2014:227)

Coping with ending a long-term
relationship (Cont’d)
2. Give yourself time [Permit yourself to be
human]
•Some say, “Time heals all wounds,” but in reality it is what
you do with that time that helps you heal. However long or
short, it’s important to permit yourself to grieve based on
being true to your own self and not because others feel you
should be over it by now. (Corey & Corey, 2014:228)

3. Express your anger [appropriately]
•Sometimes breakups leave us feeling angry and bitter.
Anger is a normal reaction, but if unexpressed or
overindulged in, anger can cause serious problems later,
especially if the anger keeps you from expressing hurt. (Corey
& Corey, 2014:228)

Coping with ending a long-term
relationship (Cont’d)

4. De-personalize your partner’s actions
•Often, when one person ends a relationship, the other is left
feeling rejected as though the failure was of his or her
making. A person’s decision to end a relationship with you
may say more about that person than it does about you. (Corey
& Corey, 2014:228)

5. Take responsibility for your own part in the
relationship [Note: It takes two to tango]
•It may be easier to find fault in the other person, but
exploring your own behaviors can be helpful to
your healing process, the point is not to find blame but to
gain insight into how you relate to people in both negative
and positive ways. (Corey & Corey, 2014:228)

Coping with ending a long-term
relationship (Cont’d)
6. Find a support network
•Having people to support you can provide you with
some level of stability in a time of loss and change. Seek
counseling or professional help if you feel that you cannot
cope with the loss on your own. (Corey & Corey, 2014:228)

7. Take care of other aspects of your life
•Setting aside time to grieve is important, yet after a certain
amount of time, other parts of you need to be attended to.
Engaging in some form of activity can help you stay
connected to the aspects of your life that continue outside
the relationship. (Corey & Corey, 2010:221)

Coping with ending a long-term
relationship (Cont’d)
8. Write in your journal
•Writing can help you release emotion even if you are not
able to talk to others about how you are feeling. Later, it
can be useful to read what you wrote to see how you
proceeded with your pain. (Corey & Corey, 2014:228)

9. Make amends
•Making amends and forgiving both yourself and your
partner can free you from carrying the pain and anger
into future relationships. Remember, your anger can
hurt and burden you more than anyone else. (Corey & Corey,
2014:228)

Coping with ending a long-term
relationship (Cont’d)
10. Get closure
•Coming to some type of closure is essential to moving
forward. To one person it may mean forgiveness, and for
another it may include some type of ritual or final letter.
Closure does not mean it never happened, rather, it means
you have decided to live. (Corey & Corey, 2014:228)

11. Love and learn
• At some point, you will find that it can be freeing to reflect
on what you have learned from the experience. Even the
most abusive or unhealthy relationship can teach you
something about yourself and the types of relationships
you want to have. (Corey & Corey, 2014:228)

A word of caution about
relationship
• We must constantly understand, build, and rebuild
our loving relationships.
• Relationships are constructions that decay over
time if they are not maintained and improved.
• We cannot expect a building to take care of itself;
the same applies to our relationships.
• We must take responsibility for making our
relationships the best they can be.

Tip for cultivating
relationships
• To cultivate relationships means to invest in
them, to put time into them, to share, to open
up.

• Movies end when love begins. It’s about
cultivating the relationship after the screen
comes down after the sun sets; that’s where
the investment, that’s where the return of
investment comes from. (Tal Ben-Shahar)

Being known rather than being validated
• A healthy relationship is about expressing
ourselves rather than trying to constantly
impress. This is the difference between being
known – express versus being validated – let
me impress him/her.
• It’s risky to open up, to express ourselves. What
if he/she doesn’t like me? What if he/she
doesn’t like what he/she finds out about me?
It’s not guaranteed.
• Yet, if we just impress, we are guaranteed failure
in long-term relationship building (Tal Ben-Shahar)

Cultivating over Finding
• In his book, Happier, Tal Ben-Shahar (2007:120)
says:
• Many people believe that the key to a successful
relationship is finding the right partner. In fact,
however, the most important and

challenging component of a happy
relationship is not finding the one
right person but rather cultivating the
one chosen relationship.

Cultivating over Finding
• Tal (2007:120-121) explains:
• The erroneous belief that place finding over
cultivating can, at least in part, be attributed to
the silver screen. Many movies are about the
search for love, the trials and tribulations that two
persons go through until they find each other.
Toward the end of the movie, the lovers get
together, kiss passionately, and then live happily
ever after – or so we assume.

Cultivating over Finding
• Tal (2007:121) stresses:
• The problem is that movies end where love
begins. It’s the living happily ever after that poses
the greatest challenge; it’s after the sun sets that
difficulties often arise.
• Tal (2007:121) further points out:
• The mistaken notion that finding love
guarantees eternal bliss leads partners to neglect
the journey - the day-to-day issues,

activities, and events that shape the
relationship.

Cultivating over Finding
• Tal (2007:121) elaborates:

• Would anyone seriously entertain the notion
that once he found his dream job, the ideal
workplace, he would no longer need to work
hard?
• Such an approach would inevitably lead to failure. It is

no different when it comes to
relationships: the real, hard work begins
after we fall in love. In the context of a
relationship, the hard work is about
cultivating intimacy.

Cultivating over Finding
• To achieve and maintain a happier relationship, Tal
(2007:121) has the following advice:
• We cultivate intimacy by knowing and being known.
We can then deepen our intimacy by acting on our
knowledge of one another – engaging in activities
that are meaningful and pleasurable to ourselves as
well as to our partners. Over time, as we get to know
one another and spend time together engaged in
activities that we care about most, we build a
foundation that can weather inevitable storms as
well as provide fertile ground for love, and
happiness, to blossom.

Shift the focus from validation to
knowing and to being known
• Tal quotes Schnarch (Ben-Shahar, 2007:119) and says that

to cultivate genuine intimacy, the focus in a
relationship must shift from the desire to be
validated – seeking approval and praise – to the
desire to be known.
• For the love and passion in a relationship to grow over time,

both partners must be willing to be known,
and this means gradually disclosing their
innermost selves – their desires, fears, fantasies, and
dreams – even when those do not show them in the most
favorable light. (Ben-Shahar, 2007:120)

Being known rather than being validated
• When we express ourselves, generally over time, it may
not be in the short term, but people will be more attracted
to us over time.
• Over time, people who are genuine will attract other
people in our friendship/romantic
relationship/leadership.
• If I impress and I do such an excellent job of it that the
other person or the other group actually like me, do they
like me or do they like that image, that facade that I
put on? In other words, it’s not me that they really like.
But it’s pretence. It’s made believe. It’s not the real
thing. (Tal Ben-Shahar)

Being known rather than being validated
• You will feel much lighter about it in your interactions
with your friends/partner when it’s about being known
rather than being validated.”
• Whether it is with our romantic partner, family, friends,
colleagues, or class, the foundation of the growth of
intimacy and passion in long-term relationships.
• to express ourselves gradually over time as trust
increases and reveals more and more
• lead to long-lasting, positive consequences to the
relationship over time. (Tal Ben-Shahar)

References
To know more about mate selection:
Duvall, E.M.; Miller, C.B. (1985) Marriage and family development. New York:
Harper and Row. (p.97-100).
Stinnet, N; Waters, J.; Stinnet, N. (1991) Relationships in Marriage and Family.
New York: Macmillan Publishing House. (pp. 30-43).
To know more about love attitude:
• Hendrick, C., Hendrick, S. S., & Dicke, A. (1998). The Love Attitudes Scale Short Form. In C. A. Simmons & P. Lehmann. (2013). Tools for strengths-based
assessment and evaluation. New York: Springer Publishing Com. (pp. 389-391)
• Hendrick, C., Hendrick, S. S., & Dicke, A. (1998). The Love Attitudes Scale:
Short Form. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 15(2), 147-159.
• Graham, J.M . (2011). Measuring love in romantic relationships: A metaanalysis. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 28(6), 748-771.

References
To know more about authentic love, love languages & coping with ending a
long-term relationship:
Corey, G., & Corey, M. S. (2010). I never knew I had a choice: explorations in
personal growth (9th edition). Australia: Brooks/Cole.
• Corey, G., & Corey, M. S. (2014). I never knew I had a choice: explorations in
personal growth (10th edition). Australia: Brooks/Cole.
• Chapman, Gary D. (1995). The five love languages: how to express heartfelt
commitment to your mate. Chicago: Northfield Pub.
Other readings
Ben-Shahar, Tal. (2007). Happier: learn the secrets to daily joy and lasting
fulfillment. New York: The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Ben-Shahar, Tal. (2011). The pursuit of perfect: how to stop chasing perfection and
start living a richer, happier life. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Greenberg, J. S. (2013). Comprehensive Stress Management. New York: McGrawHill. (pp.149-152)

