GE2223
Interpersonal Skills
and
Positive Personal
Development
Session 5
Cooperating & Resolving
conflicts in group work

Scenario
You are discussing the division of labour for a
group project with group mates. Your group has
divided the work into four parts: internet search,
interviewing, report writing, and editing. Your
group has three members: JJ, KK, and you, Chris.
You prefer to do an internet search, but JJ and
KK do not like it. During the argument, group
mates fight vigorously for what they want, and JJ
and KK criticize your abilities and work attitudes.

Further Specifications for Role Play
(Before the role-play students should be informed only of the specifications for his/her role.)

For Chris – You prefer an internet search because you are too
busy to interview; you have a PT job in the daytime. And your
language is not good enough for writing and editing.
For JJ – You prefer internet search because you have good
background knowledge and know you can do it well. You are
unhappy. Chris picks only the easiest part. If Chris does an
internet search, you also want Chris to do editing.

For KK – You prefer an internet search because you don’t
want Chris to do it: Chris is never good at doing anything
requiring ideas and organization. You want Chris to do
interviewing, being guided by a pre-set questionnaire. And you
prefer JJ to do writing and editing because JJ’s language ability
is the best among you.

Concepts to Learn
• Emotion
– How emotions affect thinking and behaviours
– Cognitive Therapy
– Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy
– Life positions (life scripts)
• Negotiation
• Conflict resolution strategies

Emotion
• What is emotion?
• There is no consensus. But, surely, emotion involves
multiple components:
– Physiological changes
– Expressive reactions and behaviours
– Cognitive changes
– Conscious feelings

• Note: Emotions do not only affect us intrapersonally but also interpersonally

Emotion
• What is emotion?

Reactions

Appraisal

The essence of emotion
is that it is an
evaluative reaction

Event

Emotion
• What is emotion?

Reactions

Appraisal – evaluation of
the meaning of the
event – is often
considered the cause of
the emotion.
Appraisal

Event

Emotion
• What is emotion?

Reactions

The emotive reaction
involves the whole range of
mental functions –
meaning that the effects of
emotion are pervasive.

Appraisal

Event

Consequences of Emotion
• Emotion influences thinking and behaviours;
 It causes reprioritising of goals
• Emotion influences decision-making;
 It gives weight to available options
• Emotion affects physical health;
 Prolonged negative emotions suppress the immune system
(Extreme (and prolonged) emotions harm our internal organs: 怒傷
肝, 喜傷心, 思[憂愁/憂慮]傷脾, 憂[悲/恨/嫉妒]傷肺, 恐傷腎
AngerLiver, JoyHeart, Thought (Being anxious/worried) 
Spleen, Worry (Depression/Sadness)Lung, Fear  Kidney)

• Emotion influences the interaction with others;
 Emotion affects interpersonal judgment and behaviours
 Emotion contagion occurs

The basic premise of cognitive therapy
• We react to our interpretation of events rather than
directly to the events themselves, which is why the same
event may elicit radically different responses from
different people.
• An event leads to a thought (an interpretation of the
event), and the thought, in turn, evokes an emotion.
• e.g., I see the audience waiting for my lecture (event),
interpret it as threatening (thought), and experience
anxiety (emotion).

Event  Thought  Emotion
(Ben-Shahar, 2011:174)

Cognitive Therapy
• External/Internal event  Thought
(evaluation/appraisal)  Emotion ( Motion/Action
(emotion leads to action/motion/behaviour)
• e.g., an event: (a lion is running towards me)
• My evaluation/appraisal (thought): (Oh my God. It’s
gonna gobble me up/eat me)
• The resultant emotion: fear (with physiological/
hormonal response) & which, of course, leads to motion
– run away or stand up bravely & fight the lion
fight-or-flight response
•
•
•

(Tal Ben-Shahar, Harvard Positive Psychology Lecture #7
認知療法1/2conitive therapy-Positive Psychology-Tal Ben-Shahar
~5-min video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6vogIzkiY-I)

Cognitive Therapy
• If we want to change emotions, whether it is of
depression, whether it is of anxiety, where we need to
intervene is the level of evaluation and the level of
thought.
• If we can change the evaluation/thought, we also can
change our emotions.
• (Tal Ben-Shahar, Harvard Positive Psychology Lecture #7)

• A-B-C Model
• Activating event
• Belief/thought/thinking
• Consequence (Consequence of behaviour and emotion)

The goal of cognitive therapy
• Much of the emotional pain we experience is avoidable, as it
is caused by distorted thinking and irrational thoughts.
• Being irrational  your emotional response is
disproportionate and unhelpful. (Ben-Shahar, 2011:174)
• The goal of cognitive therapy is to restore a sense of realism
by getting rid of distorted thinking.
• When we identify an irrational thought (a cognitive
distortion), we change the way we think about an event and
thereby change the way we feel. (Ben-Shahar, 2011:175)

Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT)
What is CBT? Cognitive Behavioral Therapy explained
~ 3-min video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ViaCs0k2jM

Cognition/Thought/Thinking

Emotion/
Feeling

Behavior

Negotiation
It is a process by which persons who seek to reach an
agreement while maximizing one’s gain.

Why Negotiate?
To maximize personal gain;
To maintain the relationship

Negotiation
People in negotiate often struggle between personal goals
and relationship goals.

When personal goals >
relationship goals:
- Negotiate to win;
- Make an agreement more
favorable to oneself than to
the other.

When relationship goals >
personal goals:
- Compromise to ease
tension;
- Make an agreement more
favorable to the other
person.

Negotiation
People in negotiation often struggle between
personal goals and relationship goals.

When both goals & relationships are
important:
- Negotiate to problem solving
- Create an agreement for mutual
benefits

Constructive Negotiation
A constructive negotiation will:
• result in an agreement that maximizes the
mutual benefit
• strengthen relationships by establishing
understanding, trust, and empathy
• clarify boundaries between people
• contribute to a rational climate in dealing with
conflicts

Constructive Negotiation
What To Do
1. Tell what you want in a descriptive, non-evaluative way;
2. Tell how you feel in a descriptive, non-evaluative way;
3. Explain the reasons for what you want and for your feelings;
4. Ask about and listen to what the other person wants, feel, and their
reasons for those wants and feelings.
5. Reverse perspectives by summarizing what the other person wants
and feels and the reasons underlying those wants and feelings;

6. Take into consideration of both parties’ needs, suggest options to
maximize joint benefits;
7. Evaluate jointly with the other partner each of the options.

Special notes on negotiation
• Remember! You cannot always be a winner
sometimes you must give up on short-term personal goals
to secure longer-term mutual benefits.

Also, you’re not the centre of the universe, and the
world does not revolve around you. Others do not
necessarily need to please you/fulfil your desires.

• Remember! Not every issue is negotiable (e.g.,
something that violates your moral principles/
unlawful/ unethical/academic dishonesty, etc. ). When
you think someone is trying to manipulate you,
instead of solving a problem, say “no” and refuse to
negotiate. (More about assertiveness in Session 10)

Life Positions (Life Scripts) & Communication Style/
Interpersonal Relationship / Emotion
~3-min video on Life Positions: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cEAo1RGJJxw

I am OK with me

You
are
OK
with
me

I am OK
You’re OK
Healthy position
Get on with
Make reference to:
Happy
What Do Say After You Say Hello?
You [Transaction analysis] (Eric
Berne, 1972). I'm OK, You're OK
(Eric Berne, 1969)

I am OK
You’re not OK
One-up position / arrogant
Get rid of
Angry (feel victimized or persecuted, so
victimize and persecute others / blame
others for their miseries / paranoid /
homicide )

I am not OK
You’re OK
One down position / placatory
Get away from / withdraw
Helpless/ powerless when compared

I am not OK
You’re not OK
Hopeless position
Get nowhere with
Hopeless /life isn’t worth

with others/ depression/suicide

anything at all/suicide or
homicides

I am Not OK with me

You
are
Not
OK
with
me

Conflict strategies
• Same as when you engage in negotiation,
you have to take into account two major
concerns in resolving conflicts:
Your personal goals
Your relationship with the other person(s)

Conflict strategies
• Same as when you engage in negotiation,
you have to take into account two major
concerns in resolving conflicts:
Your personal goals
Your relationship with the other person(s)

Conflict strategies
• The Turtle (Withdrawing):
• You give up both your goals and relationship;
• Withdrawing from a conflict over an important
issue with a friend is quite destructive;
• But sometimes it is useful, e.g. when dealing
with a hostile stranger.
Personal goal
Relationship

Conflict strategies
• The Shark (Forcing):
• You try to achieve your goals at all costs, no
matter how much it hurts the relationship;
• Never use force with someone you will have to
relate to again soon;
• We may use it when e.g. buying a used car.
Personal goal
Relationship

Conflict strategies
• The Teddy Bear (Smoothing):
• You give up your goals, let the other person achieve
his/ hers in order to maintain the relationship at a high
level;
• When the goal is actually of high importance to you,
smoothing tends to be destructive, e.g. when you
satisfy your partner’s sexual needs when you don’t
actually want to.
Personal goal
Relationship

Conflict strategies
• The Fox (Compromising):
• You give up part of your goals and sacrifice part
of the relationship;
• When you wish to solve a problem but time is
short, compromise is useful, e.g. compromise
on the destination of travel.
Personal goal
Relationship

Conflict strategies
• The Owl (Problem Solving/ Negotiating):
• You initiate negotiations aimed at ensuring that
you and the other person both achieve your
goals and maintain a high-quality relationship;
• Maximizes joint benefit and resolve any
tensions and negative feelings.
Personal goal

Relationship

Conflict strategies
Task-Oriented

Relationship-Oriented 

Turtle

Teddy bear
Fox

Shark

Owl

Conclusion
• Emotions affect thinking and behaviour because they can shift goals. It is all
right to have feelings, but their influence needs to be managed. (Give yourself
permission to be human – accept your negative emotions and let them go
through their course)
•

Our emotions/behaviour results from our cognitive appraisal of the event.
So change our thinking to change our behaviour/emotions/feelings.
(Cognitive therapy)

• There are interrelationships among our thoughts, emotions/feelings and
behaviours (CBT). Change can start from thought, emotion or behavior.
• Conflicts could be hard to resolve when it happens in committed relationships
as a result of incompatible goals.
• In committed relationships, conflicts should be resolved through problemsolving negotiations to achieve mutual benefits (win-win solution).

Conclusion

• The Golden Rule:
• Do not do unto others what you would not have done unto
yourself (己所不慾,勿施予人)
• Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Have love for your
neighbour as for yourself (愛人如己). (Matthew (馬太福音), 22:39)
• “Do unto others as you would have others do unto you.” (己
所慾, 施予人??)
• “Consider others as yourself.” (The Buddha)
• Communication researcher Milton Bennet calls The Platinum
Rule:

• “Do to others as they themselves would like to be
treated.” Rather than treating people as you would like to be treated,
interact with others the way you think they would like to be treated to be
other-oriented (Beebe et al., 2011:114)

Conclusion
Healthy/Unhealthy Conflicts
• Conflict is a natural, inevitable, important part of our relationships.
• Healthy inter-group or intra-group conflict is cognitive rather than
affective (we may lose our rational mind when we’re overwhelmed by
our emotions/feelings).
• Cognitive conflict is about focusing on the person’s behavior, thoughts,
ideas, and challenging those.
• The unhealthy conflict focuses on the person, emotions, and who they
are.
• When I attack someone for who they are, the person, the emotion, that is
not healthy, not for a group, not for a couple
• E.g. focusing on the person, “You are so inconsiderate!”
• E.g. focusing on behavior, “Do you mind putting up the toilet seat when
you have done?” (Tal Ben-Shahar)

References
To know more about positive psychology:
Ben-Shahar, Tal. (2006). Positive Psychology. Video of Positive Psychology course (PSY
1504) of Harvard University.
Ben-Shahar, Tal. (2007). Happier: learn the secrets to daily joy and lasting fulfillment. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Ben-Shahar, Tal. (2011). The pursuit of perfect: how to stop chasing perfection and start
living a richer, happier life. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Goldberg, C. (2006, March 10). Harvard’s crowded course to happiness: ‘Positive
psychology’ draws students in droves, The Boston Globe. (Retrieved September 29, 2013,
from
http://www.boston.com/news/local/articles/2006/03/10/harvards_crowded_course_to_ha
ppiness/)
Stavros，J. M., & Torres, V. B. (2005). Dynamic Relationships: Unleashing the Power of
Appreciative Inquiry in Daily Living. Ohio: Taos Institute Publications.

References
To know more about Emotion:
West, R. L., & Turner, L. H. (2009). Ch 7. Communication and Emotion. Understanding
interpersonal communication: making choices in changing times (2nd ed., pp. 214-251).
Boston: Thomson/Wadsworth.
Johnson, D. W. (2006). Ch 6. Expressing Your Feelings Nonverbally. Reaching out:
interpersonal effectiveness and self-actualization (9th ed., pp. 208-209). Boston: Pearson A
& B.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (2003). Unmasking the face. Cambridge,MA: Malor Books.
To know more about Negotiation:
Johnson, D. W. (2006). Ch 8. Resolving Interpersonal Conflicts. Reaching out: interpersonal
effectiveness and self-actualization (9th ed., pp. 260-298). Boston: Pearson A & B.

