GE2223
Interpersonal Skills
and
Positive Personal
Development
Session 10: Saying No
& Assertiveness training

Scenario
This semester you (Chris) are doing a very
difficult core course requiring you to handle rather
advanced level of knowledge. And you are too
busy to devote enough time for studying for this
course. Now you have only two more weeks
before the final exam, which contributes to 80% of
your overall grade, and yet you understand less
than 20% of the subject matter. When you share
your worries with your classmate Big L, he/she tells
you he/she is in exactly the same situation. “How
about we cooperate in the exam?” asked Big L.

Role-Play
Big L is asking you to share multiple choice
answers in the exam, because it happens that Big
L and you have similar names and you will be
arranged to sit next to each other. You have
never cheated in an exam but you are really
facing difficulties and Big L is a good friend of
yours…

There is a quick discussion question before roleplay…

Further Specifications for Chris
You already feel frustrated because you have been putting double the
effort into this course. You couldn’t bear failing the course after devoting
such a massive effort. You really need a way to pass the course but do
not see any alternative – at least for the moment – other than Big L’s
suggestion.

Address the below needs of you in your conversation with Big L:
1. Big L’s suggestion is attractive to you.
2. You do not want to leave a dirty page – cheating – in your life.
3. You know Big L needs your help, and you do not want to disappoint
him/her – not while he/she needs you.
4. You do not want to help your friend do something wrong.
(Use: Verbal communication, listening skills, giving feedback)
(Before the role-play students should be informed only of the specifications for
his/her role.)

Further Specifications for Big L
You are very frustrated by the difficulty of the course. You heard from
some seniors that it is possible to swap papers in the exam to share
answers; the teacher will not notice it in such a large class.
70% of your mind wants to do it; after all, you are not harming any one. 15%
of the rest of you fears being caught; the other 15% of you knows it is not
very good to be dishonest.
Address the below needs of you in your conversation with Chris:
1. You need Chris’ help for swapping papers to be possible.

2. You want to ease Chris’ worries for the exam.
3. You want Chris to assure you that swapping paper is alright – you are
not harming any one.

(Use: Negotiation, transactional theory, perspective taking)
(Before the role-play students should be informed only of the specifications for
his/her role.)

Concepts to Learn
•Self concept
– Three styles of behavior
– Moral values

•Interpersonal relationship
– Assertive skills: Self-assertion and
DECS

Activity
Never 1-2-3-4-5 Always
1. I ask others to do things for me without feeling guilty or anxious.
2. When someone asks me to do something I don’t want to do, I say “No” without feeling guilty or anxious.
3. I am comfortable when speaking to a large group of people.
4. I confidently express my honest opinions to authority figures (such as my lecturers).
5. When I experience strong emotions (anger, frustration, disappointment, etc.), I express them easily.
6. When I express anger, I do so without blaming others.
7. I am comfortable speaking out in a group.
8. If I disagree with the majority opinion in a meeting, I can “stick to my points” without feeling
uncomfortable or being abrasive [rude and unkind].
9. When I make a mistake, I will acknowledge it.
10. I tell others when their behavior creates a problem for me.
11. Meeting new people socially is something I do with ease and comfort.
12. When discussing my belief, I do so without labeling the opinions of others as “crazy”, “stupid”,
“ridiculous”, “irrational”.
13. I assume that most people are competent and trustworthy and do not have difficulty delegating tasks to
others. [life position: “I am OK; you’re OK”?]

14. When considering undertaking something I have never done before, I feel confident I can learn to do it.
15. I believe my needs are as important as those of others and I am entitled to have my needs satisfied.

Passive - Assertive - Aggressive
• Aggressive:
• You stand up for your own rights in a way that you violate the rights of
others.
• You ignore the needs, wants, opinions, feelings or beliefs of others.
• You express your own needs, wants and opinions in inappropriate ways.
• “You better finish all the food on the table as I said.”

• Assertive:
• You stand up for your own rights without violating the rights of others.
• You express your needs, wants, opinions, feelings and beliefs in direct,
honest and appropriate ways.
• “Mum, I’m full, I can’t eat more.”
• Passive (Submissive):
• You fail to stand up for your own rights in a way that others disregard them.
• You express your needs, wants, opinions, feelings and beliefs in apologetic,
diffident or self-effacing ways.
• You fail to express honestly your needs, wants, feelings, opinions and
beliefs.
• “Okay. I’ll eat it, Mum.”

Three styles of behavior
•Style 1: Passive
 You fail to stand up for your own rights in
a way that others disregard them;
 You express your needs, wants, opinions,
feelings and beliefs in apologetic,
different or self-effacing ways;
 You fail to express honestly your needs,
wants, feelings, opinions and beliefs;
 “Ok, I’ll help you, although I feel
somewhat inappropriate.”

Recall

Conflict strategies

• The Teddy Bear (Smoothing):
• You give up your goals, let the other person achieve
his/ hers in order to maintain the relationship at a high
level;
• When the goal is actually of high importance to you,
smoothing tends to be destructive, e.g. when you
satisfy your partner’s sexual needs when you don’t
actually want to.
Personal goal
Relationship

Three styles of behavior
•Style 2: Aggressive
 You stand up for your own rights in a
way that you violate the rights of
others;
 You ignore the needs, wants,
opinions, feelings or beliefs of others;
 You express your own needs, wants,
and opinions in inappropriate ways;
 “If you don’t help me, we are both
going to fail!”

Recall

Conflict strategies

• The Shark (Forcing):
• You try to achieve your goals at all costs, no
matter how much it hurts the relationship;
• Never use force with someone you will have to
relate to again soon;
• We may use it when e.g. buying a used car.
Personal goal
Relationship

Three styles of behavior
•Style 3: Assertive
You stand up for your own right
without violating the rights of
others;
You express your needs, wants,
opinions, feelings and beliefs in
direct, honest and appropriate
ways;
“I know you want to pass, and so
do I. But we should never cheat.”

Recall

Conflict strategies

• The Owl (Problem Solving/ Negotiating):
• You initiate negotiations aimed at ensuring that
you and the other person both achieve your
goals and maintain a high-quality relationship;
• Maximizes joint benefit and resolve any
tensions and negative feelings.
Personal goal
Relationship

Assertiveness
Being assertive does not mean attacking
or ignoring others feelings. It means you
are willing to hold up for yourself fairlywithout attacking others. – Albert Ellis
(Psychologist – Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy)

Three styles of behaviors
Own rights

Passive

Assertive

Aggressive

Not
protected

Protected

Protected

Others’
rights

Own needs,
wants and
opinions

Others’ needs,
wants and
opinions

Not
violated

Expressed in
apologetic,
different or selfeffacing ways

Submitted to

Not
violated

Expressed in
direct, honest and Respected
appropriate ways

Violated

Expressed in
inappropriate
ways

Ignored

More about the passive style
As Paterson (2000) indicates, the passive style is designed to avoid conflict at
all costs. We do this by:
•Giving in to unreasonable demands from others
•Going along with the crowd
•Not offering your opinion until others have offered theirs
•Never criticize or give negative feedback
•Neve doing or saying anything that might attract comment or disapproval
The result of the passive style:
•We give control over our lives to other people – even when we don’t want to
do so.
•We may avoid eye contact, appear nervous, look downward, and make ourselves
small.  submissive to others.
•Calling this style “passive” can be misleading. … a person using a passive
style is often more active than anyone else: scurrying around, working twice
as hard as others, explaining his or her actions, trying desperately to gain
approval, and striving to solve everyone else’s problems. [more stressed]

More about the passive style
Beliefs That Hold You Back
•We always have the choice of whether or not to be passive. But we are
not aware of making the choice.
•Instead, when we behave passively, we often feel helpless, as though
we are not in charge of our own lives.
•This is because passive behavior always results from a belief that we
are not allowed to behave in any other way.
•Here are some examples of beliefs that may hold you back:
•“Others are more important than I am.”
•“Other people are entitled to have control over their lives. I am not.”
•“They can do things effectively. I can’t.”
•“My role in life is to be the servant.” (Paterson, 2000)

•[Use CBT to work on irrational beliefs!]

More about the passive style
Passive Emotions
•There are many emotions that support the passive style. For
example:
•- A profound fear of being rejected. If you don’t do everything
others want, will they still like you?
•- Helplessness and frustration at the lack of control over your
life.
• - People who rely exclusively on the passive style are really
helpless because they cannot override the demands of others.
As a result, helplessness may escalate into discouragement, a sense
of futility, or even all-out depression.
•- Resentment at all of the demands being made on you.
•The passive style can be useful at times. As the only option,
however, it generally leads to misery. (Paterson, 2000)

More about the aggressive style
• The aggressive style is the flip side of the passive style.
• Instead of submitting to others, we try to get others to submit to us.
• It is important for us to win, regardless of the cost to other people.
• Our aim is to control the behavior of others through intimidation.
• Their opinions, boundaries, goals, and requests are stupid or
meaningless – barriers to be overcome.
• We are dominant wolves, bending others to our will.
• The funny thing is that aggressive people usually don’t feel all that
dominant.
• Instead, they feel helpless, abused, and the subject of
unreasonable and excessive demands.
• Aggression is almost always the result of feeling threatened.
Responding with anger seems perfectly justified. (Paterson, 2000)

More about the aggressive style
The Advantages of Aggression
•Aggressive behavior is usually ineffective for achieving one’s goals in the
long run. But in the short term, there are some advantages to the aggressive
style:
•-Intimidating others into doing what you want may get things done for a
while (though eventually people will resent you, have little incentive to do
things well, and feel little affection or loyalty toward you). ….
•After behaving aggressively, the feeling of power and justification usually
fades quickly. In its place come guilt for hurting the feeling of others,
shame at not being able to deal with the situation and people more rationally,
and reduce self-esteem.
•Sometimes these consequences are covered over by long and angry selfjustifications for the behavior (“they really deserve it, because ”).
•But the situation has usually been made worse, not better.
•The disagreement between you and the other person is still there, and now
they resent you for behaving badly toward them. (Paterson, 2000)

More about the assertive style
• Assertiveness is not a strategy for getting your own way.
• Instead, it recognizes that you are in charge of your own
behavior and that you decide what you will and will not do.
• Similarly, the assertive style involves recognizing that other
people are in charge of their own behavior and does not
attempt to take that control from them.
• When we behave assertively, we are able to acknowledge our
own thoughts and wishes honestly, without the expectation
that others will automatically give in to us.
• We express respect for the feelings and opinions of others
without necessarily adopting their opinions or doing what
they expect or demand. (Paterson, 2000)

More about the assertive style
• Being assertive does mean that we become inconsiderate of the
wishes of others.
• We listen to their wishes and expectations; then we decide whether or
not to go along with them.
• We might choose to do so even if we prefer to do something else. But
it is our choice.
• Whenever we go along with others, it is our decision to do so anyway.
• But we often feel helpless because we forget we are under our control.
• If we are being assertive, we may also express our preferences for
the behavior of others.
• We might assertively request that someone speak to us in a kinder
way, do a favor for us, or complete a task they have undertaken.
• But we will acknowledge that whether they do any of these things
is up to them – as indeed it is. (Paterson, 2000)

More about the assertive style
Assertiveness offers many benefits:
•It allows us to relate to others with less conflict, anxiety, and resentment.
•It allows us to be relaxed around others because we know that we will be able
to handle most situations reasonably well.
•It helps us to focus on the present situation rather than allowing our
communication to be contaminated by old resentments from the past (“This is
just like the time you”) or unrealistic fears about the future (“I can’t set a
precedent by giving in” “What if she takes this to mean” ).
•It allows us to retain our self-respect without trampling that of others.
•It increases self-confidence by reducing our attempts to live up to the
standards of others and by reducing the need for approval.
•It acknowledges the right of other people to live their lives, with the result
that they feel less resentment toward us for trying to control them.
•It gives us control over our own lives, and by reducing helplessness,
assertiveness may reduce depression.
•It is the only strategy that really allows us and others to be fully in the
relationship. (Paterson, 2000)

More about Assertiveness
Ask for what
you want
directly

Communicate
positive and negative
feelings honestly

Be aware of your
human rights and
to respect the
rights of others

But is it always appropriate to be assertive in Chinese society?
Say “No”
without guilt

Express your
personal likes
and dislikes

Talk about
yourself in a
confident way
Accept
compliments
comfortably

More about the assertive style
• You don’t have to be assertive all the time.
• Assertiveness is always about choice. Your choice.
• Sometimes, you may choose to let the issue pass
without being assertive.
• Remember the core principle:Assertiveness is about controlling your behavior,
not anyone else’s.
(Paterson, 2000)

Assertive skills: DESC Formula
• DESC: A formula for verbally expressing
assertiveness consisting of a description of the
situation, expression of feelings, specification of
preferred change, and consequences of whether or
not a change is made. (Greenberg, 2013:151)
• While using DESC in interpersonal communication,
you follow the four steps:
– D: Describe (brief and concise);
– E: Express (own and other’s feelings);
– S: Specify (the request you make to others);
– C: Consequences (both positive and negative).

DESC Formula
Describe
• Describe the situation or the behavior of the people
you are reacting to.
• Be as objective and specific as possible, and use
simple, concrete terms to describe the situation or
behavior you are referring to.

• Avoid vague terms such as “You are ignoring me”
and generalizations “You always/ never…”.
• Use expressions such as: “I would like to discuss a
matter with you now”,; “Are you aware that?”; “I’ve
noticed that…”

DESC Formula
Express
• Express your feelings (such as anger or frustration)
regarding the other person’s behavior or the situation
you have just described. (Greenberg, 2013:151)

• Express your feeling about offensive behavior from a
positive (“I feel frustrated when…”; “I have the
feeling that…”; “I believe that…”; “I think that…”
etc.) rather than a negative perspective (I hate you
when you…) and explain your feelings. Emphasize
the other person’s feelings, e.g., “I understand that
you…”

DESC Formula
Specify
• Specify the behavior you would prefer from the other person or
what you would like or need in the situation – you can negotiate
a different way of acting in the situation. The request should be
concrete and specific, and the language should refer to
objective responses rather than personality traits or
attitudes.
• Say instead: “Please stop doing X and start doing Y”, or “Please
stop playing your electric guitar at 7 am on Sunday”, than “Stop
being so inconsiderate”.
• Say, “Please take back this defective radio” instead of “Why
don’t you stop mistreating customers”.
• Rather than saying, “You should …,” use “I” statement: “I
would prefer…”, “I would like…”, “I want…”

DESC Formula
Consequences
• Spell out the consequences, positive and negative, to you
of being assertive, and consider the consequences of your
assertive responses to other people involved.
• Expressions used:
• “I will feel better if…”;
• “I would be pleased if you…”;
• “If you comply, I will do X. If not, Y.”
(Greenberg, 2013:151-152)

Assertive skills: DESC
Poor example

Good example

You’re ignoring me!
You’re insensitive,
spiteful stubborn bore.

You are not looking at me
when I ask a question and
you are not answering me.

You make me so angry I
could wring your neck. I
really hate you!

When you do this, I feel hurt.
I feel insignificant and
unimportant here.

Notice I’m alive!

Would you please look at me
and give me a good answer?

I’ll give the children up to the
orphanage and leave!

I’ll let you know I appreciate
your looking and answering
with a hug and a kiss!

Assertive skills: DESC
• Can you think of how you can apply DESC to the
scenario?
For Chris:

For Big L:

D: I’d like to talk about the
exam that we may fail;

D: I’d like to talk about a plan of
cooperation between us;

E: I feel worried about you
because you are doing
something very risky, I think;

E: I feel worried about failing this
exam, and I think you feel the
same;

S: If I agree to cooperate
with you;

S: If you don’t want to fail, there
seems to be one easy way to get a
pass which harms nobody;

C: You’ll treat me as a good
friend, but we may get
caught and risk being kicked
out.

C: Otherwise, we’ll both fail and
need to defer for one semester at
least.

Self-reflection
•What makes it so hard to say “No”?
•Are there any differences between
Chris's and Big L's difficulties?
•What are your moral values?
– To you, what is right? What is wrong?

(https://www.pinterest.com/pin/474215035733175374/)

“When you say 'yes' to others, make sure you are not
saying 'no' to yourself.” - Paulo Coelho
“當你對別人說‘是’時，確保你沒有對自己說‘不’。”

“Saying No”
• Many people find it hard to say “No” because they
feel guilty about turning people down. They think
they are too inconsiderate, self-centred, and selfish.
Therefore, many people end up saying “Yes”
reluctantly.

• Assertiveness is described as the ability to be
comfortably strong-willed about one’s thoughts,
feelings, and actions; and neither inhibited nor
aggressive in actions for the betterment of oneself in
the surrounding environment. (Seaward, 2012:235)

Assert yourself
Acting assertively enables you to:
1. express your personal likes and dislikes
• 2. be able to say no without guilt
• 3. ask for what you want directly, e.g., ask for
clarification
• 4. communicate positive and negative feelings
honestly
• 5. be aware of your human rights and to respect the
rights of others
• 6. talk about yourself in a confident way
• 7. accept compliments comfortably

Helping hints for saying “No”
• Give a reason, avoiding false modesty or white-lie excuses.
•
“I have a date on that evening already. I can’t accept another
date.”
• Make an apology with a genuine attitude rather than
ritualistic insincerity.
•
“I’m sorry I cannot help in the student union election.”
• Suggesting an alternative.
• “Jennifer is also a front-line social worker; maybe you can
interview her instead.”
• No intention to hurt others.
•
“I’m sorry if you’re hurt. I’m only turning down your request,
not rejecting you personally.”
• Share how you genuinely feel about saying “No”.
•
“I really hate to say no to you again, but still, I have to.”

Assertive Body Language
• Maintain direct eye contact
• Maintain a good body posture
• Speak clearly, audibly and firmly
• Don’t whine or use an apologetic tone
• Use gestures and facial expressions for
emphasis

Guidelines for saying no
• 1. Face the other person from a normal distance.
• If you are too far away, you may appear timid.
• If you crowd the person, you border on being aggressive.
• 2. Look the person directly in the eye.
• Averting eye contact is a sure giveaway that you will cave in.
• 3. Keep your head up, and your body relaxed.
• Don’t be a shrinking violet [shy].
• 4. Speak clearly, firmly, and at a volume that can be heard.
• 5. Just say no. You don’t need to clarify why.
• 6. Be prepared to repeat it.
• Sometimes people are persistent.
• 7. Stick to your guns.
• Do not give in – it gets easier with practice. (Blonna, 2012:248)

Guidelines for saying no
• If you feel a need to explain why you are declining,
here are a few tips for setting the stage:
• 1. Thank the person for the offer.
• 2. Express appreciation.
• 3. Affirm your friendship.
• 4. Reject the offer (or request), not the person.
(Blonna, 2012:248)

Assert yourself
The practice of assertiveness:

To say no when it’s appropriate, to say
yes when that is appropriate, to stand
for what you believe in. (Tal Ben-Shahar)

Be other-oriented
while asserting yourself
• To be other-oriented doesn’t mean only
behaving in people-pleasing ways in order to
ingratiate yourself to them.
• Rather, as an other-oriented communicator,
you are aware of the thoughts and feelings of
others, but remain true to your own ethics
and beliefs.
• (Beebe et al., 2011:58)

Your Moral Values
Which is more wrong?
How do you deal with them?

Is betraying a
friend wrong?

Is cheating
wrong?

Session 4 recall

Values

• Values are core beliefs that influence how we act. Our values
support the choices we make in life. (Corey & Corey, 2014:372)
• Your values influence what you do; your daily behavior is an
expression of your basic values. (Corey & Corey, 2014:384)
• It’s essential that you beware of the significant impact your
value systems has on your relationships with others. (Corey &
Corey, 2014:384)

• It’s not appropriate for you to push your values on others, to
assume a judgmental stance towards those who have a different
view, or to strive to convert others to adopt your perspective on
life. (Corey & Corey, 2014:384)
• If you are secure in your values and basic beliefs, you will
not be threatened by those who have a different set of beliefs
and values. (Corey & Corey, 2014:384)

Recall

Relationship Beliefs
Different beliefs and
values can clash.

Friendship

Moral values

Recall

Constructive Strategies

Focusing on today’s scenario, discuss:
• What do you say and do to achieve personal
goals?
• What do you say and do to maintain / improve
relationship?
Personal goal

Relationship

Recall

Mate Selection Process
According to The Stimulus- Value-Role Exchange Principle:

Logically speaking if there is value
conflict you have several options:
1. Change your values
2. Change your lover’s values
3. Change your lover

Is it possible to change
your values? How?

Value Stage
Evaluating compatibility of values
A fourth option is to keep your
values but adjust your behaviors

What is your choice?

Your Moral Values
Which is more wrong?
Stop and analyze your values
before conclusion!

Is betraying a
friend wrong?

Is cheating
wrong?

Conclusions
• We may feel hard to say “No” because of the bad imaginary
consequences, but it actually helps to protect the relationship
between the two parties involved;
• Saying “No” does not necessarily mean rejection of that
person, but only the request that person makes; [We can be
non-judgmental and accept the person but do not approve
his/her acts/deeds/behaviours]

• Moral value guides us in distinguishing right from wrong,
but it functions according to the priority of values. For those
who think morality should always be considered first, it may
be that moral value is among the first on their list.

References
To know more about “how to become other-oriented”:
Beebe, S. A., Beebe, S. J., & Redmond, M. V. (2011). Interpersonal communication: relating to others.
Boston: Ally & Bacon.
To know more about Three types of behavior:
Lloyd, S. R. (2002). Developing positive assertiveness (3rd ed.). Menlo Park, Calif.: Crisp Publications.
To know more about Asserting yourself:
Bishop, S. (2010). Develop your assertiveness (2nd ed.). London: Kogan Page.
Blonna, R. (2012). Coping with stress in a changing world (5th ed.). New York: The McGraw-Hill Com.
Inc.
Bower, S. A., & Bower, G. H. (1991). Asserting yourself: a practical guide for positive change. Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Greenberg, J. S. (2013). Comprehensive Stress Management. New York: McGraw-Hill. (pp.149-152)
Irwin Smith, M. J. (1975). When I say no, I feel guilty: how to cope – using the skills of systematic
assertive therapy. (拒絶的藝術 / 史密斯著 ; 李永久譯)
Kelley, C. (1979). Assertion training: a facilitator's guide. La Jolla, Calif.: University Associates.
Paterson, R. J. (2000). The Assertiveness Workbook: How to Express Your Ideas and Stand Up for
Yourself at Work and in Relationships. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Seaward, B. L. (2012). Managing stress: principles and strategies for health and well-being. (7th edition).
Burlington, Mass.: Jones & Bartlett Learning. (pp.235-238)
Shelton, N. & Burton, S. (1994). Assertiveness skills. Burr Ridge, Ill.: Business One
To know more about Moral values:
Corey, G., & Corey, M. S. (2014). I never knew I had a choice: explorations in personal growth (10th
edition). Australia: Brooks/Cole.
Rokeach, M. (1973). The Nature of Human Values. New York: The Free Press.

